Official Program of the Inauguration of President Elpidio Quirino and Vice President
Fernando Lopez. Accessed: December 8, 2020
Source:https://ia801302.us.archive.org/13/items/
OfficialProgramoftheInaugurationofPresidentElpidioQuirino/19491230-Quirino.pdf.
This document is a copy of the Official Program of President Elpidio Quirino's inauguration on
December 30, 1949 at Luneta, Manila. Quirino was a Lawyer who entered politics as a
Representative of Ilocos Sur from 1919 to 1925. He was then elected as Senator from 1925 to
1931. He was a member of the convention that drafted the 1935 Constitution and served as
Secretary of Interior and Finance during the Commonwealth period. In 1946, he was elected as
Vice President. In 1948, he succeeded the presidency after the death of Manuel Roxas. He won
the Presidency in the 1949 elections and completed his term until 1953.
This program contains details with historical importance. The first interesting detail is the cover
of the souvenir program designed by Fernando Amorsolo who then was a member of the
Inaugural Sub-Committee on Program. In the cover is a young man holding the Filipino flag --
representing the young Philippine Republic and the people who are "ready and determined to
serve, labor and produce in order to maintain, protect and defend the infant Republic." The
Program also contains biographies of President Elpidio Quirino and Ms. Victoria Quirino, the
President's daughter who served as the First Lady; and Vice President Fernando Lopez and his
wife, Mrs. Marquita Lopez. There are also excerpts from speeches of the past Philippine
Presidents and illustrations of different political personalities during important historical events.
Excerpt:
Schedule of Events
IN CONNECTION WITH THE INAUGURAL CEREMONIES
Thursday, December 29, 1949—
8:00 o'clock p.m.— Popular Inaugural Dance at Plaza Miranda,
Quiapo, under the auspices of the City of Manila.
Friday, December 30, 1949
9:30 o'clock a.m.— Assembly of participants and the general
public at the Luneta.
364
10:30 o'clock a.m.— Officials and distinguished guests will take
their seats in the Inaugural Grandstand.
10:50 o'clock a.m.— The President and the Vice President will
leave Malacañan Palace and will proceed to the Inaugural Grounds.
11:00 o'clock a.m— Arrival of the President and the Vice President
at the Inaugural Grounds.
1:05 o'clock a.m.— Salute to the National Flag.
11:10 o'clock a.m— Military Parade begins.
11:65 o'clock a.m.— Inaugural ceremonies begin.
12:00 o'clock noon— Oath taking of the President.
12:05 o'clock p.m.— Oath taking of the Vice President.
12:10 o'clock p.m.— Inaugural address of the President.
5:00, o'clock—6:00 o'clock p.m.— Concert at the Inaugural Grandstand, Luneta,
by the First Armed Forces Band, Major Antonino Buenaventura, conducting.
8:00 o'clock—10:00 o'clock p.m.—Fireworks at the Luneta.
9:00 o'clock p.m.—Inaugural Reception given by the President
and Miss Quirino at Malacañan Palace.
[Page Thirty-four]
Admission by Invitation Only—Vehicles
Admission to the Inaugural Grandstand will be by invitation.
Only vehicles bearing a special automobile pass will be
permitted to enter the Inaugural Grounds. All other vehicles will be
excluded therefrom until after the conclusion of the ceremonies.
365
[Page Thirty-five]
Place of Assembly
9:30 o'clock a.m.—
Participants in the Military Parade will assemble at the places
assigned to them.
The Inaugural Grandstand will be opened to the guests with
admission cards.
The general public will assemble at the places designated for
them.
10:00 o'clock a.m.—
Officials and distinguished guests with assigned seats will
assemble at the rear of the Inaugural Grandstand.
10:30 o'clock a.m.—
Officials and distinguished guests will proceed to the Inaugural
Grandstand to occupy their respective seats.
[Page Thirty—six ]
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY…
10:50 o'clock a.m—
ARRIVAL OF THE PRESIDENT
The.President and the Vice Presidentelect will leave Malacañan
Palace, preceded by a military escort of the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and will proceed to the Inaugural Grandstand.
11:00 o'clock a.m.—
The arrival at the Inaugural Grounds of the following officials
will be announced by a bugle call which will be the signal for
the public to rise:
366
The Vice President—elect of the Philippines
The President of the Philippines
(Upon the appearance of the President of the Philippines four ruffles and four
flourishes will be sounded, and a twenty-one gun salute rendered in his honor. )
11:05 o'clock a.m.
SALUTE TO THE NATIONAL FLAG
(Before the President and the Vice President—elect ascend the ceremohial platform,
a salute to the flag will be rendered with the First Armed Forces Band playing the
Philippine National Anthem.)
11:10 o'clock a.m.—
MILITARY PARADE
A bugle call will be sounded to announce the start of the parade
to be reviewed by the President of the Philippines.
ORDER OF UNITS
GRAND MARSHAL
Mai. Gen. MARIANO N. CASTAÑEDA
Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines
The Armed Forces of the Philippines
Philippine Military Academy
Philippine Ground Force
Philippine Constabulary
Philippine Air Force
Philippine Naval Patrol
[Page Thirty—seven]
Inaugural Ceremonies
11:55 o'clock a.m.——
1. Invocation by His Grace, Mons. GABRIEL M. REYES,
D. D., Archbishop of Manila.
12:00 o'clock noon—
2. Administration of the Oath of Office to His
367
Excellency ELPIDIO QUIRINO, President of the Philippines,
by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
(The public will rise and will remain standing throughout the oath—taking
ceremonies of the President and the Vice President. The public will be seated upon the
commencement of the President's inaugural address.
The oath—taking of the President of the Philippines will be preceded by ruffles
and flourishes, and the playing of the Philippine National Anthem.)
3. Administration of the Oath of Office to the
Honorable FERNANDO LOPEZ, Vice President—elect, by
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
4. Inaugural address by His Excellency ELPIDIO
QUIRINO, President of the Philippines.
5. The Philippine National Anthem.
[ Page Thirty-eight ]
Recession
12:45 o'clock p.m.—
Upon the conclusion of the Inaugural Ceremonies, the following
officials will retire in the order indicated below:
(The public will rise and will remain standing until after the officials named
hereunder shall have left)
The PRESIDENT,of the Republic of the Philippines
The VICE PRESIDENT of the Republic of the Philippines
The PRESIDENT and MEMBERS of the Senate
The PRESIDENT and MEMBERS of the House of Representatives
The CHIEF JUSTICE and ASSOCIATE JUSTICES of the Supreme Court of the
Philippines
The MEMBERS of the Cabinet and the Council of State
The DIPLOMATIC CORPS and their Staffs
[ Page Thirty-nine ]
368
Address of President Macapagal on Independence Day, June 12, 1964
Source:https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1964/06/12/address-of-president-macapagal-on
independence-day-june-12-1964/
Diosdado Macapagal (1910-1997) was a lawyer and statesman. He served as the president of the
Philippines from 1961 to 1965.
One of his known actions under his administration was the shift of the observance of the date of
the Independence Day from July 4 to June 12, the date when the first Philippine Republic
proclaimed its independence. The excerpt contains Macapagal’s view that an unrelenting struggle
for freedom throughout the history of the Philippine nation was acknowledged in the change of
the independence date and continued in the plight to seek the fullness of freedom through socio
economic development and agrarian reform.
Address of President Macapagal on Independence Day, June 12, 1964
THE FULLNESS OF FREEDOM
PRESIDENT MACAPAGAL’S INDEPENDENCE DAY ADDRESS AT
THE LUNETA, JUNE 12, 1964
THREE years ago today, we commenced the celebration of our day of freedom on the 12th day
of June. We made the change not out of a diminution of esteem for America but out of a sense of
fidelity to the verities of history. We have since commemorated the 4th of July as American
Philippine Friendship Day, also out of a sense of reality and truth. For it is a reality and a truth,
indeed, one of the marvels in the annals of colonialism that after the ties of sovereignty were torn
asunder between the United States and the Philippines on July 4, 1946, following forty-eight
years of colonial association, instead of the relations between the two countries since then
suffering a loosening, the bonds of friendship and partnership between the United States and the
Philippines in defense of their security and in support of common ideals have become firmer and
stronger with the passing of time.
The history of the Filipino people is an epic of an unrelenting struggle for freedom. Centuries
ago, our forebears sailed in frail vintas to settle in our islands in order to escape from the
despotism of their rulers in their aboriginal homes. In 1521, the European navigators led by
Magellan reached our shores. Upon learning that the strangers came to place our land under the
rule of Spain, our people under the Filipino patriot, Lapu-Lapu, fought to resist foreign rule,
369
resulting in the death of Magellan in the hands of Lapu-Lapu in the battle of Mactan. Finally
succumbing to the power of superior arms and brought under the rule of the Spanish crown, the
people revolted intermittently and incessantly during the whole period of the one hundred and
seventy-seven years of Spanish rule until finally a nationwide revolution led by General Emilio
Aguinaldo and the founder of the secret revolutionary society, the Katipunan, Andres Bonifacio,
under the inspiration of the Filipino hero and martyr, Dr. Jose Rizal, exploded and succeeded,
resulting in the proclamation of Philippine independence in Kawit, Cavite, on June the 12, 1898,
by General Aguinaldo and in the establishment of the Philippine Republic under a Constitution
adopted in Malolos, Bulacan, with Aguinaldo as President of the Republic.
At about this time, war broke out between the United States and Spain. Defeated in the war,
Spain ceded in the Treaty of Peace to the United States the Philippines over which it had lost
physical control. Again, the Filipino people resisted the implantation of American rule but were
subdued by superior arms with the capture of Aguinaldo in Palanan, Isabela, in 1901. Despite the
magnanimity of American rule, the Filipino people continued the struggle for freedom for forty
eight years on the battlefield of peace under a new triumvirate of great Filipino political leaders,
Manuel Quezon, Sergio Osmeña, and Manuel Roxas, until on July 4, 1946, the United States
proclaimed, restored, and recognized the independence of the Filipino people as a free and
sovereign nation.
With the recognition of political independence in 1946, the centuries-old struggle of our people
for freedom did not come to an end. What has been won so far is political freedom, which carries
the sovereign right to choose the way of life under which our people desire to live. Political
freedom is not an end in itself but a means to a greater end, for which our people are now called
upon to continue their unfinished struggle—their unfinished revolution—for freedom. That
greater end is economic freedom which would extend political freedom to the economic life of
the people and which requires the liberation of the national economy from foreign dominance
and above all, which demands the freedom from bondage to poverty and misery of the greatest
number of our people.
This is the new and continuing struggle for freedom in which our people are engaged today. It
seeks goals different from those sought in the military revolution of Aguinaldo and Bonifacio or
from those sought by the peaceful revolution for political independence of Quezon, Osmeña, and
Roxas. It seeks the readjustment and rectification of those conditions created in our society
during four hundred twenty-five years of colonial status that do not conform to the spirit,
idealism, and soul of the Filipino nation, to the end that the bounty which God in His generosity
showered upon our land shall not be a monopoly of a privileged few but shall be shared by the
greatest number of our countrymen.
By its nature, this is a difficult endeavor as, indeed, all revolutions, violent or peaceful, are
difficult endeavors. But it is a task that is inescapable and must be undertaken if we are to be
faithful to the legacy of freedom for which our forebears paid with their sacrifice and their blood.
370
There is one condition sine qua in this continued revolutionary struggle for economic freedom. It
must be sought only through the ways of freedom. It must be so because since it is freedom in its
fullness which our people have sought and fought for through generations and centuries, it would
be an unpardonable monstrosity to seek that economic freedom through totalitarianism and not
through the processes of liberty.
Our national endeavor therefore is a search for the fullness of freedom through the medium of
freedom. Thus, under the aegis of this freedom, we have striven with increasing effectiveness to
eradicate the evil of graft and corruption that has held sway in our government and among our
people during the last sixteen years since the war’s end through a moral regeneration program
that respects due process and the rule of law.
We have discarded a twelve-year system of economic controls to restore the freedom of our
currency. By this step, we have strengthened and stabilized the value of the Philippine peso and,
in addition, the measure has immediately raised the income of the exporters, producers, and
dependents of sugar, copra, abaca, minerals, palay, and other products of agriculture, industry,
and mining.
We have launched land reform to give freedom and land to the tillers of our farms after centuries
of economic and social bondage. The implementation of the land reform program will commence
this month in Plaridel, Bulacan, and thereafter will be expanded to other parts of Central Luzon
and other affected parts of the country. In this measure, we have limited its applicability to land
of at least 75 hectares in area, and we have provided for freedom of choice to the affected
landowners to shift voluntarily their capital to industry.
We have launched a five-year socio-economic development program on the basis of free
enterprise to extend freedom to our masses from the generations-old slavery to poverty by
promoting investments and production in industry, agriculture, and mining which would provide
inadequate measure the needs of our fast-increasing population.
Indicative of the effectiveness of this program, production in agriculture, industry, and mining in
1963 started to exceed the production in 1961 and continues to expand.
We have invigorated the execution of an extensive program of public works, including concrete
highways, rural roads, ports, and airfields, to give support and impetus to the establishment of
factories and other productive ventures by private enterprises.
We have given specific boost to tourism as a feature of our economic program. The successful
prospect of this undertaking is shown by the establishment at least, after many years of futile
encouragement in the past, of a ₱20 million Manila Hilton Hotel which will place our
accommodations for tourists at par with the highest world standards.
371
Realizing that liberation from bondage to the poverty of generations through our socio-economic
program will require some time, we have in the meantime endeavored to insure our people
against critical want by assuring at all times the rice and corn which is their food at reasonable
prices while assuring profits to the palay growers. We have assured that the people have ready
access to low-cost fish and other prime commodities, and we have provided ready job
opportunities for those in critical need of income.
We are selling the lots and houses of the People’s Home-site and Housing Corporation to their
occupants to which they previously only had leasehold rights, and we have built multi-storey
tenements for the virtual indigents to give them freedom from a sense of homelessness.
We have given free lots to the inhabitants of a large part of military land to satisfy their
aspiration to own the lots on which their homes are built, as their forbears had yearned to do for a
hundred years.
We have given particular support and assistance to the textile and garments industries to provide
decent and inexpensive clothing to our population.
We have sold a multi-million government textile factory to its workers to usher them to freedom
from the drudgery of endless labor into the threshold of proprietorship.
We have joined in an earnest coalition with the Labor Party to insure the legitimate effort of the
workers to safeguard their rights and pursue their welfare in the widest latitude of freedom and
justice.
While giving our people these urgent services, we have at the same time moved towards stable
abundance by seeking the establishment by statute of a Rice and Corn Authority to attain self
sufficiency in rice and corn by establishing the Fisheries Commission to increase our fish supply,
and by effectively promoting basic investments that would create permanent job opportunities.
Among the investments which show the success of the program are the ₱450 million integrated
steel plant in Iligan City, the ₱250 million pulp and paper factory in Bislig, Surigao, the ₱80
million banana establishment in Davao, the ₱80 million canned pineapple plant in Cotabato, the
₱60 million steel plate plant in Binangonan, Rizal, the ₱120 million fertilizer plant in Bataan,
and others too numerous for exhaustive mention.
To assure to our youth freedom from ignorance we have avoided the recurrent school crises and
have embarked on massive construction of new school buildings. We have likewise sought from
Congress the establishment of a Workers’ University to give an opportunity to the deserving
children of the poorest families to acquire university education.
We have respected with full understanding and without reprisal the freedom of the press and
other media to criticize the Administration to the verge of license because we espouse the
372
principle that, given a choice between licentious freedom and its regulation, we are for the
former because freedom possesses a quality of self-discipline that can remove its excesses while
regulation may amount to regimentation that can lead to tyranny.
We have cooperated in the freedom of our political adversaries not only to criticize the
Administration but also to conduct investigations against the actions of executive officials
believing that it is through free inquiries that the truth of the indictment can be established or its
falsity exposed.
Without diminishing our ties with our closest ally, the United States, we have charted a wider
course of freedom in dealing with other nations and in particular with our brothers in the Afro
Asian community.
To carry out our program of prosperous life for our people in freedom, we have set the basic
requirement of peace in the country by dealing the communist uprising a mortal blow through
the capture of its “brain,” Dr. Jesus Lava.
The final capture of Lava after eluding the authorities for eighteen years is not only a historic but
significant event. Lava led a (movement that sought substantially the same economic freedom
that we seek for our masses, but he sought his goals through the tactics of totalitarianism,
tyranny, and violence that characterize communism. Upon his capture, he acknowledged that in
our current efforts under our system of democracy, social conditions have improved and fresh
hopes have been raised for the common man. It would not be far-fetched to believe that it was
this dismay in the success of our democratic efforts for the welfare of our people which
weakened the fervor of the communist cause and Lava’s own will to continue his violent
uprising, thereby resulting in his capture after years of fugitive elusiveness.
The capture of Lava, therefore, should focus our minds on two things: firstly, that our struggle to
achieve a better life for the multitudes of our people through the ways of freedom is proving to
be the right course; therefore, thus encouraged, we can reassure our people that as long as we
have the responsibility of steering the affairs and destiny of our nation, we shall endeavor to
build a better country and a better life for our people not through any techniques of
totalitarianism but through the established Filipino way of life—through peace, freedom, and the
rule of law.
Secondly, it should be food for thought to those who now enjoy in greater measure than others
the bounty of our land that for the sake of our country and for their own sake, they ought to view
with greater understanding and even support our energetic efforts to provide effective
opportunities to the greatest number to attain a better life through the ways of peace, freedom,
and the rule of law because this is the course that will avoid the tragedy that has befallen other
nations—including nations around us— in which the inescapable struggle of the masses to share
in the wealth of their country has been accomplished in the manner in which Lava and his
movement would wish it to be achieved, through totalitarianism, tyranny, and violence, under
373
which not only wealth and comfort but life itself stands in danger of being lost. The affluent in
our society should not ignore or forget these early the warnings and lessons of our recent history,
when the alternative of violent protest rather than peaceful reform pursued by the communists
almost succeeded in overwhelming us and, destroying the sources of their wealth and fortunes.
To expand the area of basic peace upon which we pursue a prosperous and free life for our
people, we have sought to use our good offices to prevent tension and conflict in our
international neighborhood. To this end, after our independence ceremonies, much as I do not
wish to leave our country at this time, I shall be constrained to fly to Tokyo to undertake this
vital (mission. It is an hazardous mission that involves our national interest and that seeks for
ourselves and our neighbors freedom from war. I need the good wishes of all in this momentous
undertaking, for if it fails it will jeopardize the stability of our region; but if it succeeds, it will
mean not only peace in our neighborhood but an initiative in international diplomacy that will
bring honor to our entire nation.
In summation, our commemoration of our day of freedom is, therefore, not an empty ceremony
but is a realistic ritual of rededication to the substance of our lives and our aspirations as a people
which consists in the fullness of freedom. Our celebration and jubilation on the day of our
independence is as essential a part of our lives, as individuals and as a nation, as the air that we
breathe, the food that we eat, and the God whom we worship.
I need but make one more observation to end this speech. The struggle for freedom, whether
political or economic, is truly a revolution. In other lands, it has become a violent revolution. In
our country, we are lucky thus far that our revolution for a better economic life has been a
peaceful one. But whether violent or peaceful, all revolutions demand sacrifice and fortitude in
the face of transitory hardship. If we are worthy of freedom, if we are worthy of the sacrifice and
fortitude of our heroes who left us a legacy of freedom, if we are worthy of the better life that we
seek for ourselves, if we possess the manhood of a virile nation, let us not whimper in the face of
transient hardship, let us not wail over inconvenience and difficulty. Rather, as good citizens, let
us do our share in this common struggle ready to sacrifice and to undergo hardship; let us work
hard together, for this is the way to build a richer nation in free enterprise; let us realize that it is
necessary for us to undergo the cavalry of sacrifice and hard work in order to deserve and enjoy
the redemption of a better and happier life.
I end with the proud declaration of the truth that the Philippines is irrevocably a land of freedom.
The love for freedom is the outstanding trait of the Filipino. Democracy and the freedom on
which our government is founded have taken firm and very deep roots not only in the soil of our
earth but also in the soul of our people. Having espoused peace, freedom, and the rule of law as
their way of life, the Filipinos will rather die fighting for freedom than live under any tyranny,
foreign or native. Because freedom is his devout wish on this independence day, the Filipino
feels inside him that his freedom is still incomplete. There will never be the fullness of freedom
that the Filipino heart yearns for until it includes as a reality freedom from want, freedom from
poverty, freedom from misery, freedom from a hopeless life of hardship and deprivation. As the
374
leaders of two preceding generations before us contributed their share essentially in the political
sphere to the achievement of our people’s goal of freedom in its fullness, its expansion to the
freedom of our multitudes from social and economic bondage to poverty is the task of our own
generation. This is the inescapable task of all of us. On my part, with God’s benediction, I shall
do my share of the enormous task the best way I know how.
May God bless our people on this our day of freedom so that it shall become full and shall last
unto eternity.
375
Romulo, Carlos P. “Crusade in Asia” pp. 125 – 127. in Romulo Reader. Edited by Liana
Romulo. Makati: Bookmark, 1998.Excerpt also available on
Source:https://archive.org/stream/crusadeinasiaphi006144mbp/
crusadeinasiaphi006144mbp_djvu.txt
Carlos P. Romulo (1898 – 1985) was an intellectual and the country’s topmost diplomat, having
served as the secretary for foreign affairs under the presidencies of Quirino, Macapagal and
Marcos. His track record in the United Nations, serving as one-time president of its General
Assembly, showed that he was among the few Filipinos during the postwar period who made an
impact in setting an agenda for international relations and global cooperation.
This document is an excerpt from Romulo’s resignation as the Ambassador of the Philippines to
the United States, and concurrent the Permanent Delegate to the United Nations in 1953. The
select sections of the document shows Romulo’s reason that a change of leadership is needed
within the government. As of the writing of this letter, President Quirino was considering
running for a second term, and Romulo, after having conversations with Quirino and reflections
on the state of the country, Romulo made his resignation to his post in order to address the
clamor for a change in leadership. This letter shows Romulo’s resolve to resign for his post as his
personal way to preserve the future of the emerging newly independent state through a renewed
change in moral leadership.
Excerpt:
My letter of resignation to His Excellency Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, written
on May 14, 1953, reads, in part, as follows:
DEAR MR. PRESIDENT:
On board the Apo on May 1, the evening following my return to Manila at your behest, you
spoke to me frankly about the reasons why you have decided to seek the nomination of our party
376
for the second term. I informed you then that in my considered opinion it would be desirable in
the national interest that you reconsider your decision
to seek another term.
This statement rests upon the sober, impersonal conviction which I have reached that a change in
leadership would not only be a good thing for the country at this time but is indeed an essential
condition for our future progress.
It also rests upon the equally sober realization that our people profoundly desire such a change.
Our people today are weary and confused. If they are not demoralized, it is because of the
inherent spiritual power and the unshakable faith -which has distinguished them throughout the
ages, through which they have always been able to recruit renewed strength of purpose to
overcome the mightiest obstacles to their progress.
Despite the restoration of a degree of economic stability, economic difficulties among our masses
have been mounting. Economic inequalities have become more noticeable. These, with their
natural concomitant’s political confusion, social decay and above all, a noticeably growing lack
of public confidence in government have created a situation of grave national peril that is
unprecedented in our history, and that has brought deep concern to all thinking men who have
been witnesses of these phenomena.
It has not been easy for me, Mr. President, to reach the conclusion that has been forced on me by
factors and stresses visible to so many of our countrymen, that our people are in a deep
discontent under a burden of woes and grievances.
These considerations have compelled me to the conclusion that the time has come for a salutary
and necessary change in the leadership of our national life one which will remove from the palate
of our people the stale taste of promises unfulfilled, or failures, and will provide the people with
fresh resolve and inspiration, based on a reinvigorated faith in government.
And here lies the crux of the present specific political situation, the implication of which candor
compels me to note for your consideration. It cannot have escaped you that bitter feelings have
377
been engendered: and it is my conviction, shared by many, that a supreme gesture by you a
gesture not so much of self-abnegation as of a vision that rises above the level of the moderately
enlightened would act to dissolve these feelings in a solvent of national good will and
understanding, and would avert consequences which you would be the first to deplore.
Such an act on your part, all circumstances considered, would shine as an act of enlightened
statesmanship and patriotism, would constitute a heartening recognition of our democracy's
inherent capacity for renewal, and would establish you in a position of high moral leadership and
influence 'which no mere political effort could give.
I have addressed this letter to you in complete candor, out of a sense of patriotic duty. To tell you
the unvarnished truth is, I believe, the highest form of service that I can render the party now.
What happens to me personally is a matter of little consequence. It is the future of our country
that is paramount. On this, I am certain, we agree.
I am cognizant of the fact that by suggesting, as I do now, that you forbear, in the national
interest, from seeking nomination or election for another term, I am creating
a situation in which you may feel that I no longer am capable of that complete meeting of minds
which would make my continuance as your Ambassador to the United States, and Permanent
Delegate to the United Nations, possible.
For this reason I hereby have the honor to place in your hands my resignation from both
posts. Sincerely yours,
CARLOS P. ROMULO
378
Address of President Macapagal on Independence Day, August 8, 1963.
Source:https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1963/08/08/address-of-president-macapagal-at
the-signing-of-the-agricultural-land-reform-code/
One of the most well-known accomplishments of President Macapagal is agrarian land reform
through the enactment of the Republic Act No. 3844 or Agricultural Land Reform Code. The
Agricultural Land Reform Code provided the establishment of a leasehold system between
landlords and farmers which sought an end to the tenancy system that had been the prevailing
system. The law also provided the authority to acquire and distribute agrarian land equitably as
well as created a financial institution for such acquisition and distribution.
In this document, President Macapagal signed into law this agrarian land reform program with
him proclaiming that this was the culmination of the freedom of farmers. Through a historical
overview of the struggles of the farmers from the colonial times to the independent state, the land
reform code, according to Macapagal, served as a triumph not only to free the farmer from the
oppressive system but to enable him to invigorate productive agriculture for the economy of the
nation-state.
EXCERPT:
Address of President Macapagal at the signing of the Agricultural Land Reform
Code August 8, 1963
Address
of
His Excellency Diosdado Macapagal
President of the Philippines
At the Signing of the Agricultural Land Reform Code
[Delivered on August 8, 1963]
AN ACT OF EMANCIPATION
WE ARE GATHERED here to witness a very simple act. The act itself will take no more than a
few seconds, no more than a brief moment to affix a simple signature on the last page of a
printed document. It will take no more than a few quick strokes of the hand. Yet in this brief
moment are packed many centuries. This unspectacular act of signing a piece of paper will bring
to an end a long and at times bitter past of economic and human slavery which we now make
bold to abolish, and it will launch a new and better future for those languishing in poverty from
this bondage which we now make bold to build.
379
There have been times in human history when a short signature by a mortal hand could build or
demolish empires, or send nations at war with one another. Today, a signature by a humble hand
obedient to a million silent aspirations will give the toiling Filipino farmer his liberation from
poverty and social degradation. Thus, we are gathered here not merely to observe a transitory
ceremony; we are engaged in the formidable act of re-making history. We are presiding over the
dismantlement of an institution that has plagued our land for longer than four and a half
centuries. We are celebrating the initial step that will burst us under the forces and the institutions
that have kept our tenants in silent bondage over a period of time that extends to long before the
Spaniards came to our shores. We are returning to our toiling farmer the freedom that is his by
God’s grace, the dignity and security that come with the possession of his own land, and the
natural right to enjoy the rewards of his own labors. We are launching the boldest program of
land reform ever attempted in our country which shall bring redemption to the economic slaves
tilling our farms.
In a few minutes, we shall sign an enactment of Congress proposed by us into law. But we are
signing more than an ordinary code. We are signing a veritable proclamation of independence, a
declaration of faith, a declaration of determination. By this we proclaim the independence of the
shackled Filipino farmer, declare our faith in his ability to fulfill the responsibility that comes
with his newly won freedom, and declare our determination to assist him effectively in rising to
the proud status of an owner of his land and the equal in human dignity of any other citizen of
the land.
This occasion is the culmination of more than four hundred and fifty years of history of tenancy
in the Philippines. It was mostly a melancholy history; at times, it was a turbulent history. It was
a continuous history of share-cropping and debt-peonage that bore down on the shoulders of the
tenant, whether it be the mamamahay of pre-Hispanic times or the kasamahan farmer who
emerged in the eighteenth century or the share tenant of the twentieth century. Some of the old
Spanish governors-general tried to alleviate the plight of the mamamahay, but their attempts took
the form of laws that were not honored in practice. In the eighteenth century Jose Basco y Vargas
made another attempt at liberating the tenant from his servitude by prohibiting practice of
kasamahan, except in the case of landlords who had some legitimate reasons for absenteeism;
such as sickness or old age.
All through the American occupation of the Philippines and all through the Commonwealth
period the problem of the tenant was a profound concern. Some advocates of reform sought the
way of violent uprisings, strikes, or similar massive actions by tenants against landlords:
Benigno Ramos led his Sakdals, and Pedro Abad Santos, his Socialists. Others, resorting to the
methods of law, pushed the passage of measures to improve the lot of the tenants by increasing
his share of the crop or by giving him tenure or by resettling him on friar or public lands.
President Manuel Quezon announced and tried to pursue a program of social justice in an effort
to pioneer in land reform.
380
In 1946, after the war and after the transfer of political sovereignty back to the Philippines,
another tenancy law, Republic Act 34, was passed. Again it regulated sharing arrangements,
protected the tenant from undue eviction, and defined the rights and obligations of tenants and
landl ords within a system of share-tenancy.
Still another attempt at land reform, and the boldest one before this new law, was taken by
President Ramon Magsaysay. Under his administration Congress passed Republic Act 1400 in
1955. It was salutary in its intentions, but—in spite of its ambition—it suffered from the
weaknesses of its predecessors: it attacked the tenancy system on the surface, not at the roots.
The evidence of the failure of past intentions are all around us. Today we have more share
tenants than ever before. The trend is firmly established and shows no signs of levelling off,
unless fundamental measures are implemented. Even in resettlement projects which have for
their entire objective the establishment of farmer-operators tilling their own farms, the corrosive
forces of share-tenancy have penetrated and are spreading rapidly.
This trend cannot be stopped except by bold and forthright action. We cannot cure a grave
disease by simple palliatives. We cannot remove a growing social tumor by treating its surface.
We can remove it only by a quick surgery. The failure of past attempts at land reform was always
a failure of determination: they tried to alleviate the pains, the evils, the injustices of the share
tenancy system, rather than resolutely attacking the system itself. The result is that while some of
the edges of the problem have been treated with some success, the disease remains as formidable
and as threatening as ever.
It is thus not enough to deal with the bits and pieces of the problem. It is not sufficient simply to
enlarge the tenant’s share of the crop, or to give him stability of tenure, or to outlaw usury, or to
provide alternative sources of credit, for the basic disorder remains. All the problems that plague
the share-tenant—the death of his initiative, his vulnerability to usury, his weak bargaining
position before the landlord and trader, his poverty—all these have one root cause, namely, the
very institution of share of share-tenancy itself. This is the very disease that must be removed,
decisively and with determination.
Today, with a few strokes of the pen, we shall perform the initial step in this surgery. This
document before us, a bill which in a few minutes will become a statute to be known as the
Agricultural Land Reform Code, will provide us with the legal powers to remove once and for all
the system of share-tenancy that has plagued our agricultural countryside. In one statement it
declares share tenancy as violative of the law of the land, a system which will be abolished and
will no longer be tolerated by law. But the Code does not only provide us with the powers to
remove an organic disease from our agricultural society; it also provides the means of injecting
new health, new vigor, new muscles, and new strength into the new social order that will arise.
Its first and immediate step is to destroy an oppressive and intolerable system; its ensuing
objectives—which will constitute the sinews of land reform—is to nurse our agricultural
economy into a state of healthy productivity. It not only aims to turn the Filipino tenant into a
free man; it aims, most of all, to turn him into a more productive farmer.
381
Thus, after centuries of silent struggle and angry protests, the Filipino tenant finds in this
movement his victory, finds in this pen a powerful scythe with which to harvest the fruits of a
proud and productive future, finds in this gathering the jubilant witnesses of his triumph, finds on
this stage a rampart from which to view the wide and spacious fields in the country which shall
be his to till, to work, to cultivate, and to love as his own. This moment is only an initial triumph
in that the law has torn down his prison. His task from hereon is to build: to build his own
technical capabilities, to cultivate his farm efficiently and scientifically; his abilities to finance
his operations in. an orderly manner, his ability to market his produce effectively, and to invest
the savings out of his increased incomes in the further improvement of his own farm. Most of all,
his task is to change himself, his outlook, his spirit, his attitude towards work. Under the law he
will cease to be a tenant; during a transitional period he will function as a leaseholder; and after a
few years he will be a landowner. We call upon him to abandon his outlook as a tenant, and take
on the vision of a new landowner.
In this transition the Filipino farmer will need help. As a transitional leaseholder and as an
eventual landowner he will need manifold assistance, including technical, marketing, financial,
and legal. The Land Reform Code provides the government with the resources and the machinery
with which to give him all the help and support he needs. Among these are the Agricultural
Productivity Commission which will extend to him technical assistance, the Agricultural Credit
Administration which will give him operational financing and marketing assistance, the office of
Agrarian Counsel which will provide him legal assistance, the Land Authority which will assist
him to become the owner of the land he tills, and the Land Bank which will assist him to pay for
the land that has become his own.
Under the Land Reform Program, the farmer will therefore have behind him a formidable battery
of government agencies to insure that his transformation from a tenant into a lessee and
eventually into a landowner will result in increased production from our farms, in increased
incomes for our farmers, in better management of the farmer’s financial affairs, and—most of all
—in the enhancement of the dignity and the social position of those who now live under the
burden of tenancy. Realizing that the implementation of the program is the crux to the realization
of its noble objectives, we pledge all our power, all our fervor, and all our faculties to warrant the
efficient operation of all these agencies in order to insure the rise of the poverty-enslaved tenant
into a free and prosperous farmer.
The machinery for carrying out the Land Reform Program will soon be in full operation. We
shall see that the implementation of the program thereby will not be haphazard but systematic;
will not be hasty but orderly; will not be reckless but resolute. It will be pursued in manageable
stages, rather than as a breathless and one-shot effort that will sweep the nation overnight. It will
be managed prudently and well, with all due respect to the rights of all parties concerned.
In abolishing tenancy and launching a decisive and bold land reform program, we confront a
huge and monumental task. We dare say that it matches the historic proportions of no other
382
achievement of our nation in the past, save the Philippine Revolution that began in 1896. Indeed,
the Land Reform Program is a revolution in itself, part of the peaceful, ambitious, unfinished
revolution which we are now waging to win for our people an adequate measure of prosperity
and well-being. Land reform is not a separate and isolated program; it is a component, and a very
crucial component, of our wide-ranging and integrated program to promote the rapid and sound
social and economic development of our country. Land Reform will release the hitherto
suppressed productive energies of our farmers, and will thus increase the capacity of our
agricultural sector to provide our people with food and our industries with raw materials. Land
reform will increase the incomes of our agricultural society, and will thus convert it into a large
market for the produce of our industries. Land reform is not solely a program to help tenants; it is
a program to uplift the whole nation, socially and economically. It is ultimately a proof and
demonstration of the respect which our nation holds for the dignity and the rights which are
attached inseparably to the human person.
It is meet to recall at this point that the Filipino has been associated with apathy and resistance to
progress. Our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, has referred to this seeing trait as the indolence of the
Filipino which must be overcome. For centuries, the Filipino tilling our farms seemed indolent
because his creative and constructive qualities were overpowered and stifled by a sense of
hopelessness as he languished in the dark prison of his unending poverty and misery. Since life
was to him hopeless for advancement, his supreme ambition and recourse for human joy was to
spend the occasional windfalls from his lengthening debt in order to drown his sorrows in tuba
and basi or in a bet at a cockfight. This sense of hopelessness was a drug that kept him indolent
and lukewarm to the charms of progress. Through this land reform program, which releases the
tenants from endless darkness to the sunshine of new hopes, we can look forward to the day
when the so-called indolent Filipino, after centuries, shall be no more, and in his place will arise
a Filipino who shall work hard because he has a better life to work and hope for, who shall
actively take part in community work that builds the nation because he has the dignity that makes
him the equal of all his countrymen, who shall fight for his rights and do his duties because he
has effective freedom for the discharge of this responsibility, and who, in the hour of necessity,
will be happy to give even his life for his country because in his country he has land to call his
own.
The Filipino farmer has waited century after century for this very moment and this very
occasion. In a moment, as the elected President of this Republic, I shall sign the Agricultural
Land Reform Code into a law of the land. By this act the nation shall put its indelible seal on this
proclamation of the toiling farmer’s liberation and his victory.
So let this signing be recorded in our annals as an Act of Emancipation of the toiling farmer from
his slavery to debt, poverty, and misery and of his dignification as a human being and as a
citizen. By this act of emancipation, a new revolution is on.
In fulfillment of the dream of centuries and in answer to the cry for liberation of the slaved
Filipino tenant in our farms from his chains of want and misery, it is now my cherished privilege
383
and infinite honor to sign the Agricultural Land Reform Code into law as Republic Act No. 3844
on this memorable day of the Common Man.
