THEREFORE, the governments of the Republic of the Philippines and of the
United States of America agree upon the following terms for the delimitation,
establishment, maintenance and operation of military bases in the Philippines:
ARTICLE 1
GRANTS OF BASES
1. The Government of the Republic of the Philippines (hereinafter referred to as
the Philippines) grants to the Government of the United States of America
(hereinafter referred to as the United States) the right to retain the use of the bases
in the Philippines listed in Annex A attached hereto.
342
2. Philippines agrees to permit the United States, upon notice to the Philippines,
to use such of those bases listed in Annex B as the United States determines to be
required by military necessity.
3. The Philippines agrees to enter into negotiations with the United States at the
latter’s request, to permit the United States to expand such bases, to exchange
such bases for other bases, to acquire additional bases, or relinquish rights to
bases, as any of such exigencies may be required by military necessity.
4. A narrative description of the boundaries of the bases to which this
Agreement relates is given in Annex A and Annex B. An exact description of the
bases listed in Annex A, with metes and bounds, in conformity with the narrative
descriptions, will be agreed upon between the appropriate authorities of the two
Governments as soon as possible. With respect to any of the bases listed in Annex
B, an exact description with metes and bounds, in conformity with the narrative
description of such bases, will be agreed upon if and when such bases are
acquired by the United States.
ARTICLE II
MUTUAL COOPERATION
1. It is mutually agreed that the armed forces of the Philippines may serve on
United States bases and that the armed forces of the United States may serve on
Philippine military establishments whenever such conditions appear beneficial as
mutually determined by the armed forces of both countries.
2. Joint outlined plans for the development of military bases in the Philip
pines may be prepared by military authorities of the two Governments.
3. In the interest of international security any bases listed in Annexes A and B
may be made available to the Security Council of the United Nations on its call
by prior mutual agreement between the United States and the Philippines.
ARTICLE III
DESCRIPTION OF RIGHTS
343
1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the rights, power and
authority within the bases which are necessary for the establish- ment, use,
operation and defense thereof or appropriate for the control thereof and all the
rights, power and authority within the limits of territorial waters and air space
adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the bases which are necessary to provide access
to them, or appropriate for their control.
2. Such rights, power and authority shall include, inter alia, the right, power and
authority:
(a) to construct (including dredging and filling) , operate, maintain, utilize,
occupy, garrison and control the bases;
(b) to improve and deepen the harbors, channels, entrances and anchor- ages,
and to construct or maintain necessary roads and bridges affording access to
the bases;
(c) to control (including the right to prohibit) in so far as may be required for
the efficient operation and safety of the bases, and within the limits of
military necessity, anchorages, moorings, landings, takeoffs, movements and
operation of ships and waterborne craft, aircraft and other vehicles on water,
in the air or on land comprising or in the vicinity of the bases;
(d) the right to acquire, as may be agreed between the two Governments,
such rights of way, and to construct thereon, as may be required for military
purposes, wire and radio communications facilities, including submarine
and subterranean cables, pipe lines and spur tracks from railroads to bases,
and the right, as may be agreed upon between the two Governments to
construct the necessary facilities;
(i.e. to construct, install, maintain, and employ on any base any type of
facilities, weapons, substance, device, vessel or vehicle on or under the
ground, in the air or on or under the water that may be requisite or
appropriate, including meteorological systems, aerial and water navigation
lights, radio and radar apparatus and electronic devices, of any desired
power, type of emission and frequency.
3. In the exercise of the above-mentioned rights, power and authority, the
United States agrees that the powers granted to it will not be used unreasonably
or, unless required by military necessity determined by the two governments, so
as to interfere with the necessary rights of navigation, aviation, communication,
or land travel within the territories of the Philippines. In the practical application
outside the bases of the rights, power and authority granted in this Article there
shall be, as the occasion requires, consultation between the two Governments.
344
ARTICLE IV
SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION
1. It is mutually agreed that United States public vessels operated by or for the
War or Navy Departments, the Coast Guard or the Coast and Geodetic Survey,
and the military forces of the United States, military and naval aircraft and
Government-owned vehicles, including armor, shall be accorded free access to
and movement between ports and United States bases throughout the Philippines,
including territorial waters, by land, air and sea. This right shall include freedom
from compulsory pilotage and all toll charges. If, however, a pilot is taken,
pilotage shall be paid for at appropriate rates. In connection with entrance into
Philippine ports by United States public vessels appropriate notification under
normal conditions shall be made to the Philippine authorities.
2. Lights and other aids to navigation of vessels and aircraft placed or
established in the bases and territorial waters adjacent thereto or in the vicinity of
such bases shall conform to the system in use in the Philippines. The position,
characteristics and any alterations in the lights or other aids shall be
communicated in advance to the appropriate authorities of the Philippines.
3. Philippine commercial vessels may use the bases on the same terms and
conditions as United States commercial vessels.
4. It is understood that a base is not a part of the territory of the United
States for the purpose of coastwise shipping laws so as to exclude Philippine
vessels from trade between the United States and the bases.
ARTICLE V
EXEMPTION FROM CUSTOMS AND OTHER DUTIES
No import, excise, consumption or other tax, duty or import shall be charged
on material, equipment, supplies or goods, including food stores and clothing,
for exclusive use in the construction, maintenance, operation or defense of the
bases, consigned to, or destined for, the United States authorities and certified
by them to be for such purposes.
ARTICLE VI
345
MANEUVER AND OTHER AREAS
The United States shall, subject to previous agreement with the Philip- pines,
have the right to use land and coastal sea areas of appropriate size and location
for periodic maneuvers, for additional staging areas, bombing and Nunnery
ranges, and for such intermediate airfields as may be required for safe and
efficient air operations. Operations in such areas shall be carried on with due
regard and safeguards for the public safety.
ARTICLE VII
USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES
It is mutually agreed that the United States may employ and use for United States
military forces any and all public utilities, other services and facilities, airfields,
ports, harbors, roads, highways, railroads, bridges, via- ducts, canals, lakes, rivers
and streams in the Philippines under conditions no less favorable than those that
may be applicable from time to time to the military forces of the Philippines.
ARTICLE VIII
HEALTH MEASURES OUTSIDE BASES
It is mutually agreed that the United States may construct, subject to agreement by
the appropriate Philippine authorities, wells, water catchment areas or dams to
insure an ample supply of water for all base operations and personnel. The United
States shall likewise have the right, in cooperation with the appropriate authorities
of the Philippines, to take such steps as may be mutually agreed upon to be
necessary to improve health and sanitation in areas contiguous to the bases,
including the right, under such conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, to enter
and inspect any privately owned property. The United States shall pay just
compensation for any injury to persons or damage to property that may result from
action taken in connection with this Article.
ARTICLE IX
SURVEYS
It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right, after appropriate
notification has been given to the Philippines, to make topographic, hydrographic,
and coast and geodetic surveys and aerial photo- graphs in any part of the
Philippines and waters adjacent thereto. Copies with title and triangulation data of
346
any surveys or photomaps made of the Philippines shall be furnished to the
Philippines.
ARTICLE X
CEMETERIES AND HISTORICAL SITES
1. The United States shall have the right to retain and maintain such United States
military cemeteries and such sites of historical significance to the United States as
may be agreed upon by the two Governments. All rights, power and authority in
relation to bases granted under this Agreement shall be applicable, in so far as
appropriate, to the cemeteries and sites mentioned in this Article.
2. Furthermore, it is recognized that there are certain cemeteries and historical sites
in the Philippines revered in the memory of the People of the United States and of
the Philippines, and it is therefore fitting that the maintenance and improvement of
such memorials be the common concern of the two countries.
ARTICLE XI
IMMIGRATION
1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to bring into the
Philippines members of the United States military forces and the United States
nationals employed by or under a contract with the United States together with their
families, and technical personnel of other nationalities (not being persons excluded
by the laws of the Philippines) in connection with the construction, maintenance, or
operation of the bases. The United States shall make suitable arrangements so that
such persons may be readily identified and their status established when necessary
by the Philippine authorities. Such persons, other than members of the United States
armed forces in uniform, shall present their travel documents to the appro- priate
Philippine authorities for visas, it being understood that no objection will be made
to their travel to the Philippines as non-immigrants.
2. If the status of any person within the Philippines and admitted thereto under the
foregoing paragraph shall be altered so that he would no longer be entitled to such
admission, the United States shall notify the Philippines and shall, ‘I such person be
required to leave the Philippines by the latter government, be responsible for
providing him with a passage from the Philippines within a
347
reasonable time, and shall in the meantime prevent his becoming a public
responsibility of the Philippines.
ARTICLE XII
INTERNAL REVENUE TAX EXEMPTION
1. No member of the United States armed forces, except Filipino citizens, serving
in the Philippines in connection with the bases and residing in the Philippines by
reason only of such service, or his dependents, shall be liable to pay income tax in
the Philippines except in respect of income derived from Philippine sources.
2. No national of the United States serving in or employed in the Philippines in
connection with the construction, maintenance, operation, or defense of the bases
and residing in the Philippines by reason only of such employment, or his spouse
and minor children and dependent parents or either spouse, shall be liable to pay
income tax in the Philippines except in respect of income derived from Philippine
sources or sources other than the United States sources.
3. No person referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be liable to pay
to the Government or local authorities of the Philippines any poll or residence tax,
or any import or export duty, or any other tax on personal property imported for his
own use; provided that privately owned vehicles shall be subject to payment of the
following only: when certified as being used for military purposes by appropriate
United States authorities, the normal license plate fee; otherwise, the normal license
plate and registration fees.
4. No national of the United States, or corporation organized under the laws of the
United States, resident in the United States, shall be liable to pay income tax in the
Philippines in respect of any profits derived under a contract made in the United
5tates with the Government of the United States in connection with the construction,
maintenance, operation and defense of the bases, or any tax in the nature of a license
in respect of any service or work for the United States in connection with the
construction, maintenance, operation and defense of the bases
ARTICLE XIII “
JURISDICTION
348
1. The Philippines consents that the United States shall have the right to
exercise jurisdiction over the following offenses:
(a) Any offense committed by any person within any base except where the
offender and offended parties are both Philippine citizens (not members of the
armed forces of the United States on active duty) or the offense is against the
security of the Philippines;
(b) Any offense committed outside the bases by any member of the armed
forces of the United States in which the offended party is also a member of the
armed forces of the United States; and
(c) Any offense committed outside the bases by any member of the armed
forces of the United States against the security of the United States.
2. The Philippines shall have the right to exercise jurisdiction over all other offenses
committed outside the bases by any member of the armed forces of the United
States.
3. Whenever for special reasons the United States may desire not to exercise the
jurisdiction reserved to it in paragraphs 1 and 6 of this Article, the officer holding
the offender in custody shall so notify the fiscal (prosecuting attorney) of the city or
province in which the offense has been committed within ten days after his arrest,
and in such a case the Philippines shall exercise jurisdiction.
4. Whenever for special reasons the Philippines may desire not to exercise the
jurisdiction reserved to it in paragraph 2 of this Article, the fiscal (prosecuting
attorney) of the city or province where the offense has been committed shall so
notify the officer holding the offender in custody within ten days after his arrest, and
in such a case the United States shall be free to exercise jurisdiction. If any offense
falling under paragraph 2 of this Article is committed by any member of the armed
forces of the United States
(a) while engaged in the actual performance of a specific military
duty, or
(I›) during a period of national emergency declared by either government and
the fiscal (prosecuting attorney) so finds from the evidence, he shall
immediately notify the officer holding the offender in custody that the United
States is free to exercise jurisdiction. In the event the fiscal (prosecuting
attorney) finds that the offense was not committed in the actual performance
of a specific military duty, the offender’s commanding officer shall have the
right to appeal from such finding to the Secretary of Justice
349
within ten days from the receipt of the decision of the fiscal and the decision
of the Secretary of Justice shall be final.
5. In all cases over which the Philippines exercises jurisdiction the custody of the
accused, pending trial and final judgment, shall be entrusted without delay to the
commanding officer of the nearest base, who shall acknowledge in writing that such
accused has been delivered to him for custody pending trial in a competent court of
the Philippines and that he will be held ready to appear and will be produced before
said court when required by it. The commanding officer shall be furnished by the
fiscal (prosecuting attorney) with a copy of the information against the accused
upon the filing of the original in the competent court.
6. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, it is mutually agreed that in time of
war the United States shall have the right to exercise exclusive jurisdiction over any
offenses which may be committed by members of the armed forces of the United
States in the Philippines.
7. The United States agrees that it will not grant asylum in any of the bases to any
person fleeing from the lawful jurisdiction of the Philippines. Should any such
person be found in any base, he will be surrendered on demand to the competent
authorities of the Philippines.
8. In every case in which jurisdiction over an offense is exercised by the United
States, the offended party may institute a separate civil action against the offender in
the proper court of the Philippines to enforce the civil liability which under the laws
of the Philippines may arise from the offense.
ARTICLE XIV
ARREST AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
1. No arrest shall be made and no process, civil or criminal, shall be served within
any base except with the permission of the commanding officer of such base; but
should the commanding officer refuse to grant such permission he shall (except in
cases of arrest where the United States has jurisdiction under Article XIII) forthwith
take the necessary steps to arrest the person charged and surrender him to the
appropriate authorities of the Philippines or to serve such process, as the case may
be, and to provide the attendance of the server of such process before the
350
appropriate court in the Philippines or procure such server to make the necessary
affidavit or declaration to prove such service as the case may require.
2. In cases where the service courts of the United States have jurisdiction under
Article XIII, the appropriate authorities of the Philippines will, on request, give
reciprocal facilities as regards the service of process and the arrest and surrender of
alleged offenders.
ARTICLE XV
SECURITY LEGISLATION
The Philippines agrees to take such steps as may from time to time be agreed to be
necessary with a view to the enactment of legislation to insure the adequate security
and protection of the United States bases, equipment and other property and the
operations of the United States under this Agreement, and the punishment of
persons who may contravene such legislation. It is mutually agreed that appropriate
authorities of the two t3overnments will also consult from time to time in order to
insure that laws and regulations of the United States and of the Philippines in
relation to such matters shall, so far as may be possible, be uniform in character.
ARTICLE XVI
POSTAL FACILITIES
It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to establish and
maintain United States post offices in the bases for the exclusive use of the United
States armed forces, and civilian personnel who are nationals of the United States
and employed in connection with the construction, maintenance, and operation of
the bases, and the families of such persons, for domestic use between United States
post offices in the bases and between such post offices and other United States post
offices. The United States shall have the right to regulate and control within the
bases all communications within, to and from such bases.
ARTICLE XVII
REMOVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS
351
1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to remove or
dispose of any or all removable improvements, equipment or facilities located at or
on any base and paid for with funds of the United States. No export tax shall be
charged on any material or equipment so removed from the Philippines.
2. All buildings and structures which are erected by the United States in the bases
shall be the property of the United States and may be removed by it before the
expiration of this Agreement or the earlier relinquishment of the base on which the
structures are situated. There shall be no obligation on the part of the United States
or of the Philippines to rebuild or repair any destruction or damage inflicted from
any cause whatsoever on any of the said buildings or structures owned or used by
the United States in the bases. The United States is not obligated to turn over the
bases to the Philippines at the expiration of this Agreement or the earlier
relinquishment of any bases in the condition in which they were at the time of their
occupation, nor is the Philippines obliged to make any compensation to the United
States for the improvements made in the bases or for the buildings or structures left
thereon; all of which shall become the property of the Philippines upon the
termination of the Agreement or the earlier relinquishment by the United States of
the bases where the structures have been built.
ARTICLE XVIII
SALES AND SERVICES WITHIN THE BASES
1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to establish on
bases, free of all licenses; fees; sales, excise or other taxes, or imposts; Government
agencies, including concessions, such as sales commissaries and post exchanges,
messes and social clubs, for the exclusive use of the United States military forces
and authorized civilian personnel and their families. The merchandise or services
sold or dispensed by such agencies shall be free of all taxes, duties and inspection
by the Philippine authorities. Administrative measures shall be taken by the
appropriate authorities of the United States to prevent the resale of goods which are
sold under the provisions of this Article to persons not entitled to buy goods at such
agencies and, generally, to prevent abuse of the privileges granted under this
Article. There shall be cooperation between such authorities and the Philippines to
this end.
2. Except as may be provided in any other agreements, no person shall habitually
render any professional services in a base except to or for the United States or to or
for the persons mentioned in the preceding paragraph. No business shall be
established in a base, it being understood that the Government agencies mentioned
352
in the preceding paragraph shall not be regarded as businesses for the purposes of
this Article.
ARTICLE XIX
COMMERCIAL CONCERNS
It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right, with the consent of
the Philippines, to grant to commercial concerns owned or controlled by the citizens
of the United States or of the Philippines such rights to the use of any base or
facility retained or acquired by the United States as may be deemed appropriate by
both Governments to insure the development and maintenance for defense purposes
of such bases and facilities.
ARTICLE XX
MILITARY OR NAVAL POLICE
It is mutually agreed that there shall be close. cooperation on a reciprocal basis
between the military and naval police forces of the United States and the police
forces of the Philippines for the purpose of preserving order and discipline among
United States military and naval personnel
ARTICLE XXI
TEMPORARY INSTALLATIONS
1. It is mutually agreed that the United States shall retain the right to occupy
temporary quarters and installations now existing outside the bases mentioned in
Annex A and Annex B, for such reasonable time, not exceeding two years," as may
be necessary to develop adequate facilities within the bases for the United States
armed forces. If circumstances require an extension of time, such a period will be
fixed by mutual agreement of the two Governments; but such extension shall not
apply to the existing temporary quarters and installations within the limits of the
City of Manila and shall in no case exceed a period of three years.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Port of Manila
reservation with boundaries as of 1941 will be available for use to the United
States armed forces until such time as other arrangements can be made for supply
of the bases by mutual agreement of the two Governments.
353
3. The terms of this Agreement pertaining to bases shall be applicable to temporary
quarters and installations referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article while they are so
occupied by the armed forces of the United States; provided, that offenses
committed within the temporary quarters and installations located within the present
limits of the City of Manila shall not be considered as offenses within the bases but
shall be governed by the Provisions of Article XIII, paragraphs 2 and 4, except that
the election not to exercise the jurisdiction reserved to the Philippines shall be made
by the Secretary of Justice. It is agreed that the United States shall have full use and
full control of all these quarters and installations while they are occupied by the
armed forces of the United States, including the exercise of such measures as may
be necessary to police said quarter5 for the security of the personnel and property
therein.
ARTICLE XII
CONDEMNATION OR EXPROPRIATION
1. Whenever it is necessary to acquire by condemnation or expropriation
proceedings real property belonging to any private persons, associations or
corporations located in bases named in Annex A and Annex B in order to carry
out the purposes of this Agreement, the Philippines will institute and prosecute
such condemnation or expropriation proceedings in accordance with the laws of
the Philippines. The United States agrees to reimburse the Philippines for all the
reasonable expenses, damages and costs thereby incurred, including the value of
the property as determined by the Court. In addition, subject to the mutual
agreement of the two Governments, the United States will reimburse the
Philippines for the reasonable costs of transportation and removal of any
occupants displaced or ejected by reason of the condemnation or expropriation.
2. Prior to the completion of such condemnation or expropriation proceedings,
in cases of military necessity the United States shall have the right to take
possession of such property required for military purposes as soon as the legal
requisites for obtaining possession have been fulfilled.
3. The properties acquired under this Article shall be turned over to the
Philippines upon the expiration of this Agreement, or the earlier relinquish ment
of such properties, under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by
the two Governments.
ARTICLE XXIII
CIVIL LIABILITY
354
For the purpose of promoting and maintaining friendly relations by the prompt
settlement of meritorious claims, the United States shall pay just and reasonable
compensation, when accepted by claimants in full satisfaction and in final
settlement, for claims, including claims of insured but excluding claims of
subrogees, on account of damage to or loss or destruction of private property,
both real and personal, or personal injury or death of inhabitants of the
Philippines, when such damage, loss, destruction or injury is caused by the
armed forces of the United States, or individual members thereof, including
military or civilian employees thereof, or otherwise incident to non-combat
activities of such forces; provided that no claim shall be considered unless
presented within one year after the occurrence of the accident or incident out of
which such claim arises.
ARTICLE XXIV
MINERAL RESOURCES
All minerals (including oil) , and antiquities and all rights relating thereto and
to treasure trove, under, upon, or connected with the land and water comprised
in the bases or otherwise used or occupied by the United States by virtue of this
Agreement, are reserved to the Government and inhabitants of the Philippines;
but no rights so reserved shall be transferred to third parties, or exercised within
the bases, without the consent of the United States. The United States shall
negotiate with the proper Philippine authorities for the quarrying of rock and
gravel necessary for construction work on the bases.
ARTICLE XXV
GRANT OF BASES TO A THIRD POWER
1. The Philippines agrees that it shall not grant, without prior consent of the
United States, any bases or any rights, power, or authority what- soever, in or
relating to bases, to any third power.
2. It is further agreed that the United States shall not, without the consent of the
Philippines, assign, or underlet, or part with the possession of the whole or any
part of any base, or of any right, power or authority granted by this Agreement,
to any third power.
ARTICLE XXVI
DEFINITION OF BASES
355
For the purposes of this Agreement, bases are those areas named in Annex A
and Annex B and such additional areas as may be acquired for military
purposes pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
ARTICLE XXVII
VOLUNTARY ENLISTMENT OF PHILIPPINE CITIZENS
It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to recruit
citizens of the Philippines for voluntary enlistment into the United States armed
forces for a fixed term of years, and to train them and to exercise the same
degree of control and discipline over them as is exercised in the case of other
members of the United States armed forces. The number of such enlistments to
be accepted by the armed forces of the United States may from time to time be
limited by agreement between the two Governments.
ARTICLE XXVIII
UNITED STATES RESERVE ORGANIZATIONS
It is mutually agreed that the United States shall have the right to enroll and
train all eligible United States citizens residing in the Philippines in the Reserve
organizations of the armed forces of the United States, which include the
Officers Reserve Corps and the Enlisted Reserve Corps, except that prior
consent of the Philippines shall be obtained in the case of such persons who are
employed by the Philippines or any Municipal or Provincial Government
thereof.
ARTICLE XXIX “
TERM OF AGREEMENT
The present Agreement shall enter into force upon its acceptance " by the
two Governments and shall remain in force for a period of ninety-nine years
subject to extension thereafter as agreed by the two Governments.
Signed in Manila, Philippines, in duplicate this fourteenth day of March, nineteen
hundred and forty seven.
On behalf of the Government of the United States of America:
Paul V. McNutt [SEAL]
356
Ambassador, Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the
United States of America to the Republic of the
Philippines
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines:
Manuel Roxas [SEAL]
President of the Philippines
ANNEX A
Clark Field Air Base, Pampanga. Fort
Stotsenberg, Pampanga.
Mariveles Military Reservation, POL Terminal and Training Area, Bataan. Camp
John Hay Leave and Recreation Center, Baguio.
Army Communications System with the deletion of all stations in the Port of
Manila Area.
United States Armed Forces Cemetery No. 2, San Francisco del Monte, Rizal.
Angeles General Depot, Pampanga.
Leyte-Samar Naval Base including shore installations and air bases.
Subic Bay, Northwest Shore Naval Base, Zambales Province, and the existing
Naval reservation at Olongapo and the existing Baguio Naval Reservation.
Tawi Tawi Naval Anchorage and small adjacent land areas.
Canacao-Sangley Point Navy Base, Cavite Province.
Bagobantay Transmitter Area, Quezon City, and associated radio receiving
and control sites, Manila Area.
Tarumpitao Point (Loran Master Transmitter Station), Palawan. Talampulan
Island, Coast Guard fi354 (Loran) , Palawan.
Naule Point (Loran Station) , Zambales.
Castillejos, Coast Guard Q356, Zambales.
357
ANNEX B
Mactan Island Army and Navy Air Base.
Florida Blanca Air Base, Pampanga.
Aircraft Service Warning Net.
Camp Wallace, San Fernando, La Union.
Puerto Princesa Army and Navy Air Base, including Navy Section Base and
Air Warning Sites, Palawan.
Tawi Tawi Naval Base, Sulu Archipelago. Aparri Naval Air Base.
EXCHANGES OF NOTES
The American Ambassador to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA EMBASSY OF THE
March 14, 1947
EXCELLENCY
I have the honor to state, in signing the Agreement of March 14, 1947,
Between the United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines
Concerning Military Bases, the understanding of my Government that the
question of the adjustment of any rights and titles held by the United States
pursuant to the provisions of the Act of Congress of March 24, 1934 (48 Stat.
456) as amended, specifically Section 10(b) thereof, the Joint Resolution of the
Congress of June 29, 1944, and the Act of Congress of July 3, 1946, and Treaties
and Agreements heretofore entered into between the United States and the
Philippines, to real property in any of the bases covered by the aforementioned
Agreement or any naval reservations or fueling stations not so covered is
reserved and will be settled subsequently in accordance with the terms of the
Acts and Joint Resolution of the Congress mentioned above.
I should be appreciative if I might be informed of the concurrence of Your
Excellency’s Government with the understanding above set forth.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
PAUL V.
McNUTT
358
His Excellency
ELPIDIO QUIRINO
Secretary of Foreign Affairs for the
Republic of the Philippines
359
The Secretary of Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador
REPUBLIC OF THE
PHILIPPINES DEPARTMENT OF
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
MANILA, March 14, 1947
EXCELLENCY :
With reference to Your Excellency’s note of March 14, 1947, the substantive
paragraph of which reads:
[For text, see above.]
I have the honor to state that, without conceding the existence of any rights
or titles to the real property therein referred to, my Government concurs with
the understanding above set forth.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
ELPIDIO QUIRINO
Vice-President and concurrently
Secretary of Foreign Affairs
His Excellency
PAUL V. McNUTT
United States Ambassador
Manila
360
The American Ambassador to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs
EMBASSY OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
March 14, 1947
EXCELLENCY :
I have the honor to state in signing the Agreement of March 14, 1947 Between the
United States of America and the Republic of the Philippines Concerning Military
Bases, the understanding of my Government that the garrisoning and development of
the said bases shall be the concern of the Government of the United States of America.
I shall be appreciative if I may be informed of the concurrence of Your Excellency’s
Government with the understanding above set forth.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
PAUL V. McNUTT
His Excellency
ELPIDIO QUIRINO
Secretary of Foreign Affairs for the
Republic of the Philippines
361
The Secretary of Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Foreign Affairs
MANILA, March 14, 1947
EXCELLENCY :
In reply to your note of even date regarding the garrisoning and development of the
bases covered by the Agreement of March 14, 1947, between the Republic of the
Philippines and the United States of America concerning military bases, I have the
honor to state that it is the understanding of my Government that the question of
garrisoning and development of said bases shall be the concern of the Government of
the United States.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
ELPIDIO QUIRINO
Vice-President and concurrently
Secretary of Foreign Affairs
His Excellency
PAUL V. McNUTT
American Ambassador to the Philippines
Manila
The Secretary of Foreign Affairs to the American Ambassador
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
MANILA March 14, 1947
EXCELLENCY:
In the signing of the Agreement on March 14, 1947, between the Republic of the
Philippines and the United States of America concerning military bases, I have the honor
to state that it is the understanding of my Government that the existing national and
provincial and other rights of way of the Republic of the Philippines running through the
bases covered in Annex A and Annex B of the Agreements if tore particularly the
362
national road running through Camp John Hay and the naval reservation at Baguio, shall
continue to be used as such by the public and that this understanding shall be
administratively brought about in the enforcement of said Agreement.
I will highly appreciate it, therefore, if I can be informed of the concur- rence of Your
Excellency’s I ovemment with the understanding set forth above.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
ELPIDIO QUIRINO
Vice-President and concurrently Secretary
of Foreign Affairs
His Excellency
PAUL N. McNUTT
United States Ambassador
Manila
The American Ambassador to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs
EMBASSY OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
March 14, 1947
EXCELLENCY
With reference to Your Excellency’s note of March 14, 1947, the substantive
paragraph of which reads:
(For text, see above.]
I have the honor to state that without conceding the existence of any national or
provincial or other rights of way of the Republic of the Philippines running through any
of the bases covered in Annex A and Annex B of the Agreement and subject to such
adjustments in rights of way as may be required by military necessity in accordance
with paragraph 3 of Article III, my Government concurs with the understanding above
set forth.
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.
PAUL V. McNUTT
His Excellency
