217
EXCERPT FROM THE DIARY OF CARRIE CHAPMAN CATT.
-THE PHILIPPINES- (PART-XI)-
-JULY 19th. To AUGUST 20th. 1912-
ANNOTATION
Carrie Chapman Catt and Dr. Aletta Jacob visited Manila for a three-week visit as part of a
worldwide tour. Catt, who led the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA) and
founded the League of Women Voters, was supportive of the Philippine suffrage movement. They met a
group of Filipino and American women at the Manila Hotel in 1912. Two of the women were Sofia de
Veyra and Pura Villanueva Kalaw. Both were leaders of their respective organizations. Pura was the
president of the Asociacion Femenista Ilonga and Sofia was a founding member of the Asociacion
Femenista Filipina).
Eventually, the Society for the Advancement of Women (SAW) was formed with an equal number
of Filipino and American founding members before Catt left the Philippines. Catt observed that SAW was
the first society in which both Filipinos and Americans were united in work. SAW became the Manila
Women’s Club, which later became part of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs. The women in
these clubs campaigned tirelessly to get the 300,000 votes from Filipino women for the 1937 Amended
Election Law to be passed. This paved the way for women to take up leadership roles in politics. Since
then, the Philippines has witnessed the election of two female presidents, and many women have been
elected or appointed to positions on a national and local government level.
Catt, Carrie Chapman Diaries, July 19-Aug. 20, 1912
Philippines
The Women of the Philippines
The arrival in Manilla of two leaders of women-Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt of the United States
and Dr. Aletta Jacobs of Holland-who come to make investigation of the condition of women in
the Philippines is a really interesting event. They come at an opportune time. Social conditions
and problems are uppermost in the minds of all who are working for the advancement of the
Philippines and if these ladies can contribute anything of value it will be very welcome. They
bring to their mission several advantages that weigh even against extended local experience.
They are enthusiasts and specialists, they have been studying the affairs and problems of the
women in other counters, their eyes are new and they can get contrasts denied to local students.
There seems [to be] but one possible criticism of their plan and that is the time they have allotted
to their work-it appears insufficient. But if they are given the maximum of assistance they can
cover a great deal of ground and to that end the writer ventures the suggestion that the
government, the chiefs of all local institutions of women, the officers of the local women's
societies and all who are interested in their purpose join in forwarding their work. These
investigators will at the very outset discover many interesting things about the women of the
218
Philippines. They will quickly discern that they are whole lot better than the men, an advantage
by no means limited to mere morals. They excel their men in business, in energy and industry, in
thrift. They do more for their homes and their families than do their men. They have caught the
new spirit of progression that is abroad in the land and have a leading part in it. They are filling
the schools and their attainments in scholarship equal to those of the other sex. They have taken
the first steps toward the professions, notably medicine and nursing, and their work is rich in
promise for the future. They have for years been leaders in the local household industries and
will be an important element in the commercial life of the islands when that sphere is enlarged by
the work of the schools and the special efforts that the government is now devoting to it.
Speaking in a broad and general sense the writer is inclined to believe that the rights of woman in
the Philippines are fairly protected and conserved by both the laws of the land and the family and
social customs that obtain. In common with her people, she needs educational, social and
material advancement but she will share fully in these advantages as they come. Much is planned
for her but perhaps much more can and should be done for her, and if the two investigators can
be helpful their ideas and suggestions will be welcomed. The cause of suffrage, in which the two
visiting ladies are especially interested, has not been advanced here and conditions would
indicate that the time is not ripe. However, let not us deter; it would be diverting whether
practical or not.
SUFFRAGETTES FOR ISLANDS
Manila Times, Aug 16, 1912 Mrs. Catt Organizes Local Women for Work
Manila is to have an active, fully organized woman's suffrage society club. The organization of
this association was perfected yesterday at the Manila hotel by Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt, at a
meeting held with several of the more prominent American and Filipino women of the city. The
association is to be known as the Society of the Advancement of Women and it has four
American and four Filipino lady officials. Theyare: president, Mrs. C.S. Lobingier;
vice president, Senora Victorino Mapa. The minutes of the meetings are to be kept in two
languages, Spanish and English. Mrs.Calderon will act as Spanish secretary and Mrs. Saleeby
will be the English secretary. Mrs. Goodale is treasurer of the society and there is an advisory
committee composed of the following well known ladies: Senora Teodoro Kalaw, Senorita Lopez
and Mrs. Quinan. The first meeting of the society will be held on August 29th, at the home of
Mrs. Logingier on Calle San Marcelino. In speaking of the society and its formation yesterday
Mrs. Catt said to a TIMES man this morning: "The society will, of course take up whatever work
it desires, but its first object will be to study the women's suffrage movement. The society
already has quite a number of members and they are the most prominent and best women in the
city. I feel sure that the organization of this society here will do an immense amount of good in
more ways than one."
Asked regarding her impressions of the Philippines and the conditions here, Mrs. Catt, who
leaves this evening on the Prinz Sigismund for Hongkong, said: "I feel that I have been here such
219
a short time that I do not fully understand conditions as I should like to and for that reason am
thinking of returning again next year. Personally, I found things very interesting here. Results are
being wrought out here which are going to tell for the hindrance or benefit of every Asiatic
country. If the Filipinos are really benefited by the broad system of education which has been
inculcated here, if they become imbued with ideas of business honesty, if they become able to
handle the large commercial problems and can be trusted with the responsibilities
of government, it will have an immense effect on other adjacent countries. "I have heard from
several sources that candidates for political preferment in the provinces have used money and
that other corrupt practices have crept in. If such bad customs are kept up, England, France,
Germany and the Netherlands will point to that as the final condemnation of the Asiatic countries
to govern themselves, and it is of the upmost importance that the voters of the islands be made to
see that and combine in condemning such practices.
"For this reason I think it would be a wise step if the women of the country were given the right
to vote for all agree that the women of the islands are more upright and honorable than the men
and they would make the men be honest, too." Asked what she thought of the immediate
independence idea, Mrs. Catt said: -"The people of the islands are much better off under the
liberal policy of the United States than if they were given independence and all its attendant
dangers. The United States hold the Philippine by as fair a title as any colonies are held by
foreign
countries; they came to us by the fortunes of war and to give them up would be an act of
philanthropy and independence should not be given the islands until all the people are educated
and their men are more fitted to cope with the political and commercial problems which now
beset the archipelago. Independence, moreover, could not be given the islands at this time unless
all the nations entered into an agreement to keep hands off under all circumstances and I feel sure
that the various nations would not enter into such a covenant. Personally, I should like to see the
islands converted into a territory and afterwards into a state, a part of the United States. I think
that would be for their best interests."
220
THE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE ACT
(TYDINGS-MCDUFFIE ACT) 1934
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE OF THE
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, TO PROVIDE FOR THE ADOPTION OF A CONSTITUTION
AND A FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES.
ANNOTATION
The Tydings-McDuffie Act known as the Philippine Independence Act of 1934 is a U.S. law that
provided for Philippine independence. It is a slightly revised version of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill
passed by the U.S. Congress in 1933 but was vetoed by U.S. President Herbert Hoover. The U.S.
Congress overrode the veto but was rejected by the Philippine Senate upon urgings of Manuel L. Quezon.
Quezon wanted an amended bill. The new bill named, The Philippine Independence Act was authored by
Senator Milliard Tydings (Democrat) of Maryland and Representative John McDuffie (Democrat) of
Alabama. The new president, Franklin D. Roosevelt, signed it into law on March 24, 1934.
Among the significant provisions of the law are: (1)The election of the leaders of Philippine
Commonwealth; (2) The recognition of Philippine independence on July 4, 1946; (3)The right of the
United States to establish military bases in the country; (4) Granting the United States president the power
to call on all military forces of the Philippines into service; (5) Reclassifying all Filipinos as aliens and
limiting immigration to the United States to 50 persons per year. The law also stipulated that the
Philippines would practice neutrality. Meaning, it could not go to war without the permission of the
United States except when it had to protect itself. The Philippine Legislature ratified the Tydings
McDuffie law on May 1, 1934. From then on, Filipinos busied themselves with preparations for the
establishment of the Commonwealth government.
Convention to Frame Constitution for Philippine Islands
Section 1. The Philippine Legislature is hereby authorized to provide for the election of delegates
to a constitutional convention, which shall meet in the hall of the House of Representatives in the
capital of the Philippine Islands, at such time as the Philippine Legislature may fix, but not later
than October 1, 1934, to formulate and draft a constitution for the government of the
Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands, subject to the conditions and qualifications prescribed
in this Act, which shall exercise jurisdiction over all the territory ceded to the United States by
the treaty of peace concluded between the United States and Spain on the 10th day of December,
1898, the boundaries of which are set forth in Article III of said treaty, together with those
islands embraced in the treaty between Spain and the United States concluded at Washington on
the 7th day of November, 1900. The Philippine Legislature shall provide for the necessary
expenses of such convention.
Character of Constitutions — Mandatory Provisions
221
Sec. 2. (a) The constitution formulated and drafted shall be republican in form, shall contain a
bill of rights, and shall, either as a part thereof or in an ordinance appended thereto, contain
provisions to the effect that, pending the final and complete withdrawal of the sovereignty of the
United States over the Philippine Islands —
(1) All citizens of the Philippine Islands shall owe allegiance to the United States. (2) Every
officer of the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall, before entering
upon the discharge of his duties, take and subscribes an oath of office, declaring, among other
things, that he recognizes and accepts the supreme authority of and will maintain true faith and
allegiance to the United States.
(3) Absolute toleration of religious sentiment shall be secured and no inhabitant or religious
organization shall be molested in person or property on account of religious belief or mode of
worship.
(4) Property owned by the United States, cemeteries, churches, and parsonages or convents
appurtenant thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improvements used exclusively for religious,
charitable, or educational purposes shall be exempt from taxation.
(5) Trade relations between the Philippine Islands and the United States shall be upon the basis
prescribed in section 6.
(6) The public debt of the Philippine Islands and its subordinate branches shall not exceed limits
now or hereafter fixed by the Congress of the United States; and no loans shall be contracted in
foreign countries without the approval of the President of the United States.
(7) The debts, liabilities, and obligations of the present Philippine Government, its provinces,
municipalities, and instrumentalities, valid and subsisting at the time of the adoption of the
constitution, shall be assumed and paid by the new government.
(8) Provision shall be made for the establishment and maintenance of an adequate system of
public schools, primarily conducted in the English language.
(9) Acts affecting currency, coinage, imports, exports, and immigration shall not become law
until approved by the President of the United States.
(10) Foreign affairs shall be under the direct supervision and control of the United States.
(11) All acts passed by the Legislature of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall be
reported to the Congress of the United States.
(12) The Philippine Islands recognizes the right of the United States to expropriate property for
public uses, to maintain military and other reservations and armed forces in the Philippines,
222
and, upon order of the President, to call into the service of such armed forces all military forces
organized by the Philippine Government.
(13) The decisions of the courts of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall be subject
to review by the Supreme Court of the United States as provided in paragraph 6 of section 7.
(14) The United States may, by Presidential proclamation, exercise the right to intervene for the
preservation of the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands and for the
maintenance of the government as provided in the constitution thereof, and
for the protection of life, property, and individual liberty and for the discharge of government
obligations under and in accordance with the provisions of the constitution.
(15) The authority of the United States High Commissioner to the government of the
Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands, as provided in this Act, shall be recognized.
(16) Citizens and corporations of the United States shall enjoy in the Commonwealth of the
Philippine Islands all the civil rights of the citizens and corporations, respectively, thereof.
(b) The constitution shall also contain the following provisions, effective as of the date of the
proclamation of the President recognizing the independence of the Philippine Islands, as
hereinafter provided:
(1) That the property rights of the United States and the Philippine Islands shall be promptly
adjusted and settled, and that all existing property rights of citizens or corporations of the United
States shall be acknowledged, respected, and safeguarded to the same extent as property rights of
citizens of the Philippine Islands.
(2) That the officials elected and serving under the constitution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of this Act shall be constitutional officers of the free and independent Government of
the Philippine Islands and qualified to function in all respects as if elected directly under such
government, and shall serve their full terms of office as prescribed in the constitution.
(3) That the debts and liabilities of the Philippine Islands, its provinces, cities, municipalities,
and instrumentalities, which shall be valid and subsisting at the time of the final and complete
withdrawal of the sovereignty of the United States, shall be assumed by the free and independent
Government of the Philippine Islands; and that where bonds have been issued under authority of
an Act of Congress of the United States by the Philippine Islands, or any province, city, or
municipality therein, the Philippine Government will make adequate provision for the necessary
funds for the payment of interest and principal, and such obligations shall be a first lien on the
taxes collected in the Philippine Islands.
223
(4) That the Government of the Philippine Islands, on becoming independent of the United
States, will assume all continuing obligations assumed by the United States under the treaty of
peace with Spain ceding said Philippine Islands to the United States.
(5) That by way of further assurance the Government of the Philippine Islands will embody the
foregoing provisions [except paragraph (2)] in a treaty with the United States.
Submission of Constitution to the President of the United States
Sec. 3. Upon the drafting and approval of the constitution by the constitutional convention in the
Philippine Islands, the constitution shall be submitted within two years after the enactment of
this Act to the President of the United States, who shall determine whether or not it conforms
with the provisions of this Act. If the President finds that the proposed constitution conforms
substantially with the provisions of this Act he shall so certify to the Governor-General of the
Philippine Islands, who shall so advise the constitutional convention. If the President finds that
the constitution does not conform with the provisions of this Act he shall so advise the Governor
General of the Philippine Islands, stating wherein in his judgment the constitution does not so
conform and submitting provisions which will in his judgment make the constitution so
conform.The Governor-General shall in turn submit such message to the constitutional
convention for further action by them pursuant to the same procedure hereinbefore defined, until
the President and the constitutional convention are in agreement.
Submission of Constitution to Filipino People
Sec. 4. After the President of the United States has certified that the constitution conforms with
the provisions of this Act, it shall be submitted to the people of the Philippine Islands for their
ratification or rejection at an election to be held within four months after the date of such
certification, on a date to be fixed by the Philippine Legislature, at which election the qualified
voters of the Philippine Islands shall have an opportunity to vote directly for or against the
proposed constitution and ordinances appended thereto. Such election shall be held in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Philippine Legislature, to which the return of the election
shall be made. The Philippine Legislature shall by law provide for the canvassing of the return
and shall certify the result to the Governor-General of the Philippine Islands, together with a
statement of the votes cast, and a copy of said constitution and ordinances. If a majority of the
votes cast shall be for the constitution, such vote shall be deemed an expression of the will of the
people of the Philippine Islands in favor of Philippine independence, and the Governor-General
shall, within thirty days after receipt of the certification from the Philippine Legislature, issue a
proclamation for the election of officers of the government of the Commonwealth of the
Philippine Islands provided for in the constitution. The election shall take place not earlier than
three months nor later than six months after the proclamation by the Governor-General ordering
224
such election. When the election of the officers provided for under the constitution has been held
and the results determined, the Governor-General of the Philippine Islands shall certify the
results of the election to the President of the United States, who shall thereupon issue a
proclamation announcing the results of the election, and upon the issuance of such proclamation
by the President the existing Philippine Government shall terminate and the new government
shall enter upon its rights, privileges, powers, and duties, as provided under the constitution. The
present Government of the Philippine Islands shall provide for the orderly transfer of the
functions of government.
If a majority of the votes cast are against the constitution, the existing Government of the
Philippine Islands shall continue without regard to the provisions of this Act.
Transfer of Property and Rights to Philippine Commonwealth
Sec. 5. All the property and rights which may have been acquired in the Philippine Islands by the
United States under the treaties mentioned in the first section of this Act, except such land or
other property as has heretofore been designated by the President of the United States for and
other reservations of the Government of the United States, and except such land or other property
or rights or interests therein as may have been sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with
law, are hereby granted to the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands when
constituted.
Relations with the United States Pending Complete Independence
Sec. 6. After the date of the inauguration of the government of the Commonwealth of the
Philippine Islands trade relations between the United States and the Philippine Islands shall be as
now provided by law, subject to the following exceptions:
(a) There shall be levied, collected, and paid on all refined sugars in excess of fifty thousand
long tons, and on unrefined sugars in excess of eight hundred thousand long tons, coming into
the United States from the Philippine Islands in any calendar year, the same rates of duty which
are required by the laws of the United States to be levied, collected, and paid upon like articles
imported from foreign countries.
(b) There shall be levied, collected, and paid on all coconut oil coming into the United States
from the Philippine Islands in any calendar year in excess of two hundred thousand long tons, the
same rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United States to be levied, collected, and
paid upon like articles imported from foreign countries.
225
(c) There shall be levied, collected, and paid on all yarn, twine, cord, cordage, rope and cable,
tarred or untarred, wholly or in chief value of Manila (abaca) or other hard fibers, coming into
the United States from the Philippine Islands in any calendar year in excess of a collective total
of three million pounds of all such articles hereinbefore enumerated, the same rates of duty
which are required by the laws of the United States to be levied, collected, and paid upon like
articles imported from foreign countries.
(d) In the event that in any year the limit in the case of any article which may be exported to the
United States free of duty shall be reached by the Philippine Islands, the amount or quantity of
such articles produced or manufactured in the Philippine Islands thereafter that may be so
exported to the United States free of duty shall be allocated,
under export permits issued by the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands,
to the producers or manufacturers of such articles proportionately on the basis of their
exportation to the United States in the preceding year; except that in the case of unrefined sugar
the amount thereof to be exported annually to the United States free of duty shall be allocated to
the sugar-producing mills of the Islands proportionately on the basis of their average annual
production for the calendar years 1931, 1932, and 1933, and the amount of sugar from each mill
which may be so exported shall be allocated in each year between the mill and the planters on the
basis of the proportion of sugar to which the mill and the planters are respectively entitled. The
Government of the Philippine Islands is authorized to adopt the necessary laws and regulations
for putting into effect the allocation hereinbefore provided.
(e) The government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall impose and collect an
export tax on all articles that may be exported to the United States from the articles that may be
exported to the United States from the Philippine Islands free of duty under the provisions of
existing law as modified by the foregoing provisions of this section including the articles
enumerated in subdivisions (a), (b) and (c), within the limitations therein specified, as follows:
(1) During the sixth year after the inauguration of the new government the export tax shall be 5
per centum of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United States to be levied,
collected, and paid on like articles imported from foreign countries;
(2) During the seventh year after the inauguration of the new government the export tax shall be
10 per centum of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United States to be
levied, collected, and paid on like articles imported from foreign countries;
(3) During the eighth year after the inauguration of the new government the export tax shall be
15 per centum of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United States to be
levied, collected, and paid on like articles imported from foreign countries;
226
(4) During the ninth year after the inauguration of the new government the export tax shall be 20
per centum of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United States to be levied,
collected, and paid on like articles imported from foreign countries;
(5) After the expiration of the ninth year of the inauguration of the new government the export
tax shall be 25 per centum of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the United
States to be levied collected and paid on like articles imported from foreign countries.
The government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall place all funds received in
such export taxes in a sinking fund, and such funds shall, in addition to other moneys available
for the purpose, be applied solely to the payment of the principal interest on the bonded
indebtedness of the Philippine
Islands, provinces, municipalities, and instrumentalities until such indebtedness has been fully
discharged.
When used in this section in a geographical sense, the term "United States" includes all
Territories and possessions of the United States, except the Philippine Islands, the Virgin Islands,
American Samoa, and the island of Guam.
Sec. 7. Until the final and complete withdrawal of American sovereignty over the Philippine
Islands—
(1) Every duly adopted amendment to the constitution of the government of the Commonwealth
of the Philippine Islands shall be submitted to the President of the United States for approval. If
the President approves the amendment or if the President fails to disapprove such amendment
within six months from the time of its submission, the amendment shall take effect as a part of
such constitution.
(2) The President of the United States shall have authority to suspend the taking effect of or the
operation of any law, contract, or executive order of the government of the Commonwealth of the
Philippine Islands, which in his judgment will result in a failure of the government of the
Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands to fulfill its contracts, or to meet its bonded
indebtedness and interest thereon or to provide for its sinking funds, or which seems likely to
impair the reserves for the protection of the currency of the Philippine Islands, or which in his
judgment will violate international obligations of the United States.
(3) The Chief Executive of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall make an annual
report to the President and Congress of the United States of the proceedings and operations of
the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands and shall make such other
reports as the President or Congress may request.
227
(4) The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, a United States
High Commissioner to the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands who shall
hold office at the pleasure of the President and until his successor is appointed and qualified. He
shall be known as the United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. He shall be the
representative of the President of the United States in the Philippine Islands and shall be
recognized as such by the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands, by the
commanding officers of the military forces of the United States, and by all civil officials of the
United States in the Philippine Islands. He shall have access to all records of the government or
any subdivision thereof, and shall be furnished by the Chief Executive of the Commonwealth of
the Philippine Islands with such information as he shall request.
If the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands fails to pay any of its bonded
or other indebtedness or the interest thereon when due or to fulfill any of its contracts, the United
States High Commissioner shall immediately
report the facts to the President, who may thereupon direct the High Commissioner to take over
the customs offices and administration of the same, administer the same, and apply such part of
the revenue received therefrom as may be necessary for the payment of such overdue
indebtedness or for the fulfillment of such contracts. The United States High Commissioner shall
annually, and at such other times as the President may require, render an official report to the
President and Congress of the United States. He shall perform such additional duties and
functions as may be delegated to him from time to time by the President under the provisions of
this Act.
The United States High Commissioner shall receive the same compensation as is now received
by the Governor-General of the Philippine Islands, and shall have such staff and assistants as the
President may deem advisable and as may be appropriated for by Congress, including a financial
expert, who shall receive for submission to the High Commissioner a duplicate copy of the
reports to the insular auditor. Appeals from decisions of the insular auditor may be taken to the
President of the United States. The salaries and expenses of the High Commissioner and his staff
and assistants shall be paid by the United States.
The first United States High Commissioner appointed under this Act shall take office upon the
inauguration of the new government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands.
(5) The government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands shall provide for the
selection of a Resident Commissioner to the United States, and shall fix his term of office. He
shall be the representative of the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands and
shall be entitled to official recognition as such by all departments upon presentation to the
President of credentials signed by the Chief Executive of said government. He shall have a seat
in the House of Representatives of the United States, with the right of debate, but without the
right of voting. His salary and expenses shall be fixed and paid by the Government of the
228
Philippine Islands. Until a Resident Commissioner is selected and qualified under this section,
existing law governing the appointment of Resident Commissioners from the Philippine Islands
shall continue in effect.
(6) Review by the Supreme Court of the United States of cases from the Philippine Islands shall
be as now provided by law; and such review shall also extend to all cases involving the
constitution of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands.
Sec. 8. (a) Effective upon the acceptance of this Act by concurrent resolution of the Philippine
Legislature or by a convention called for that purpose, as provided in section 17:
(1) For the purposes of the Immigration Act of 1917, the Immigration Act of 1924 [except
section 13 (c)], this section, and all other laws of the United States
relating to the immigration, exclusion, or expulsion of aliens, citizens of the Philippine Islands
who are not citizens of the United States shall be considered as if they were aliens. For such
purposes the Philippine Islands shall be considered as a separate country and shall have for each
fiscal year a quota of fifty. This paragraph shall not apply to a person coming or seeking to come
to the Territory of Hawaii who does not apply for and secure an immigration or passport visa, but
such immigration shall be determined by the Department of the Interior on the basis of the needs
of industries in the Territory of Hawaii.
(2) Citizens of the Philippine Islands who are not citizens of the United States shall not be
admitted to the continental United States from the Territory of Hawaii (whether entering such
territory before or after the effective date of this section) unless they belong to a class declared to
be non-immigrants by section 3 of the Immigration Act of 1924 or to a class declared to be non
quota immigrants under the provisions of section 4 of such Act other than subdivision (c) thereof,
or unless they were admitted to such territory under an immigration visa. The Secretary of Labor
shall by regulations provide a method for such exclusion and for the admission of such excepted
classes.
(3) Any Foreign Service officer may be assigned to duty in the Philippine Islands, under a
commission as a consular officer, for such period as may be necessary and under such
regulations as the Secretary of State may prescribe, during which assignment such officer shall
be considered as stationed in a foreign country; but his powers and duties shall be confined to the
performance of such of the official acts and notarial and other services, which such officer might
properly perform in respect to the administration of the immigration laws if assigned to a foreign
country as a consular officer, as may be authorized by the Secretary of State.
(4) For the purposed of sections 18 and 20 of the Immigration Act of 1917, as amended, the
Philippine Islands shall be considered a foreign country.
229
(b) The provisions of this section are in addition to the provisions of the immigration laws now
in force, and shall be enforced as part of such laws, and all the penal or other provisions of such
laws not applicable, shall apply to and be enforced in connection with the provisions of this
section. An alien, although admissible under the provisions of this section, shall not be admitted
to the United States if he is excluded by any provision of the immigration laws other than this
section, and an alien, although admissible under the provisions of the immigration laws other
than this section, shall not be admitted to the United States if he is excluded by any provision of
this section.
(c) Terms defined in the Immigration Act of 1924 shall, when used in this section, have the
meaning assigned to such terms in the Act.
Sec. 9. There shall be no obligation on the part of the United States to meet the interest or
principal of bonds and other obligations of the Government of the Philippine Islands or of the
provincial and municipal governments thereof,
hereafter issued during the continuance of United States sovereignty in the Philippine Islands:
Provided, That such bonds and obligations hereafter issued shall not be exempt from taxation in
the United States or by authority of the United States.
Recognition of Philippine Independence and Withdrawal of American
Sovereignty
Sec. 10. (a) On the 4th, day of July immediately following the expiration of a period of ten years
from the date of the inauguration of the new government under the constitution provided for in
this Act the President of the United States shall by proclamation withdraw and surrender all right
of possession, supervision, jurisdiction, control, or sovereignty then existing and exercised by the
United States in and over the territory and people of the Philippine Islands, including all military
and other reservations of the Government of the United States in the Philippines (except such
naval reservations and fueling stations as are reserved under section 5), and, on behalf of the
United States, shall recognize the independence of the Philippine Islands as a separate and self
governing nation and acknowledge the authority and control over the same of the government
instituted by the people thereof, under the constitution then in force.
(b) The President of the United States is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into
negotiations with the Government of the Philippine Islands, not later than two years after his
proclamation recognizing the independence of the Philippine Islands, for the adjustment and
settlement of all questions relating to naval reservations and fueling stations of the United States
in the Philippine Islands, and pending such adjustment and settlement the matter of naval
reservations and fueling stations shall remain in its present status.
230
Neutralization of Philippine Islands
Sec. 11. The President is requested, at the earliest practicable date, to enter into negotiations with
foreign powers with a view to the conclusion of a treaty for the perpetual neutralization of the
Philippine Islands, if and when the Philippine independence shall have been achieved.
Notification to Foreign Governments
Sec. 12. Upon the proclamation and recognition of the independence of the Philippine Islands,
the President shall notify the governments with which the United States is in diplomatic
correspondence thereof and invite said governments to recognize the independence of the
Philippine Islands.
Tariff Duties After Independence
Sec. 13. After the Philippine Islands have become a free and independent nation there shall be
levied, collected, and paid upon all articles coming into the United States from the Philippine
Islands the rates of duty which are required to be levied, collected, and paid upon like articles
imported from other foreign countries: Provided, That at least one year prior to the date fixed in
this Act for the independence of the Philippine Islands, there shall be held a conference of
representatives of the Government of the United States and the Government of the
Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands, such representatives to be appointed by the President
of the United States and the Chief Executive of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands,
respectively, for the purpose of formulating recommendations as to future trade relations between
the Government of the United States and the independent Government of the Philippine Islands,
the time, place, and manner of holding such conference to be determined by the President of the
United States; but nothing in this proviso shall be construed to modify or affect in any way any
provision of this Act relating to the procedure leading up to Philippine independence or the date
upon which the Philippine Islands shall become independent.
Immigration After Independence
Sec. 14. Upon the final and complete withdrawal of American sovereignty over the Philippine
Islands the immigration laws of the United States (including all the provisions thereof relating to
persons ineligible to citizenship) shall apply to persons who were born in the Philippine Islands
to the same extent as in the case of other foreign countries.
