EXCERPT:
My loyalty to my party ends where my loyalty to my country begins
This is a day of transcendental importance to me. l am going to take a step the
consequences of which I have foreseen, out the result of which God alone knows. From the time
I entered public life I fought under the banner of the Nationalism Party. I affiliated with it at a
time when the only words written on its flag were: Immediate Independence. I affiliated with it
when the struggle we carried on during the revolution was still fresh in my mind and I thought it
my solemn duty to form part of a political organization to defend the very same ideals for which
the soldiers of the Revolution fought and fell.
The Nacionalista Party and the entire Filipino people know how faithfully I have served my
party colleagues. Everybody knows how I fought for them within and without the ranks and that
I never hesitated to come to the fore to defend the party's ideals and its men. I want to recall at
this moment, with satisfaction and without regret. how I have always supported and defended
hints with all sincerity and even as strongly as his strongest supporters could have done. I
defended the party at least as much as the staunchest Nacionalista and the most dyed-in the wool
Unipersonalist.
But the party never has been and never will be the people. My loyalty to my party ends where
my loyalty to my country begins. Even if it were not the Nationalism Party, let it be any other
party, from the moment that my convictions do not coincide with the ideal For which the party
stands, I consider it my duty to leave it. A man to be worthy of the name should put his
conviction into practice, profess them with faith, defend them with courage, happen what may.
247
My colleagues of the Nationalism party know that rumor has been spread and broadcast that
the disagreement in the party is due to personal ambitions, jealousies and envies. Those who
are more intimately linked with the march of events know full well that it is due to nothing
else but a difference in opinion that grew wider as days went by.
I did not look for the conflict. The conflict was thrust on me. A recent arrival from the United
States, the Filipino people know that I had to undergo medical treatment, that my health was
broken, that I needed test. I tried to avoid it because I knew that it was going to mean a fight,
and I did not want conflict, I wanted harmony, pace.
The conflict came in spite of myself. Confronted by it, I had to defend the principles which I
sincerely believed were just. After the reorganization of the Lower House, on a more liberal
basis than it has eve: been in the past, I invited pace. I was answered that the fight has not
ended. On another occasion again I asked for peace, and again I was answered that the fight was
on, and then I was told chat the issue was going to be presented to the convention and that those
who shall refuse to abide by the decision of the majority shall be expelled from the parry.
You will agree with me, gentlemen, that those who believe with me in the principles of
collective leadership because it is their honest conviction were not going to retreat nor surrender.
It was a question of principle and conviction and there is no pity on earth that can make them
change their views.
The convention met. The principles of the collective group were accepted They were
accepted so avid the split, a split that at fax they wanted to force but Mach Leer they exerted
all efforts to prevent.
The independence question was brought forward as argument against the reorganization of
a new party. Resignations were tendered. Sacrifices were offered or nude in order to maintain
the union in the party. The collective theory of leadership and other collective propositions
were accepted and incorporated at the party platform. fliers-thing was taken advantage of for
the sake of the unity of the party. Ideas and principles were sacrificed. The motto of the
Unipersonality was: Sacrifice all principles, but save the party at all cost! The motto of the
Collectivists is: Save the principles and sacrifice everything, even the party itself!
We did not look for the division. I did not favor the split. But it exists now, fatal to the
country, perhaps, but necessary for the health of the country. My Collectivist colleagues know
how much I tried to avoid this conflict especially so when the collective principles were
accepted by the Unipersonalists. I was opposed to a division in the party. That is why you must
have noticed how the papers spoke of union one day and the next day of a possible split, union
the next and a division the following day and so on.
The positive fact is that nobody can prevent the split in the Nacionalista Party. It is divided
because men who were once united, now disagree on fundamental questions that vitally affect
the country. While some are conservatives, others are liberal. and while some are
248
Unipersonalists others are Collectivists. The Nacionalista Party might have incorporated the
collective principles but this was because those who are in it saw that it as the only salvation for
its men, during the coming elections. The one who over A month ago was an out-and-out
Unipersonalist and overnight mined a complete somersault and changed into a Collectivists,
cannot profess that faith with sincerity. It is a conviction for convenience, and it cannot and
should not be taken at its face value.
It is said that there is no difference between the Unipersonal and Collective theories. It is a
question of mere form, they say. The Unipersonalist who thinks that the present conflicting
tendencies are not a sufficient foundation to differentiate one from the other does not either
understand the real question at issue or in accepting the Collective principles, accepted them
inching sincerity The difference is fundamental
The Collectivists believe in a true government of democracy, not only in form, but also in
fact, not the people's rule without the expression of popular will, but a government by the
people by means of a voluntary expression of the sovereign will of that people. The
Collectivists want a government of opinion, not a government that solves questions without the
country's knowledge or how or when the solution was made.
One of the greatest arguments used against us by our American critics is that we do not have
here a government of opinion. But is that a more conclusive proof of the fact that there is public
opinion here than the present triumph of the Collective principle of leadership? Is there one who
doubts that this question has already been decided by the people? When this question was
dismissed for the first time, almost all the papers, with very few exceptions, were in favor of the
unipersonal theory and against the collective principle. What was the effect on the people?
Nothing, absolutely nothing. The people decided for themselves. And this shows beyond the
shadow of a doubt that here we have public opinion, courageous, independent, unbiased. Those
who followed this question with interest must have seen that the Filipino people is interested in
matters that vitally affect its government, and that is capable of forming its own opinion,
without the need of tutors or mentors. I repeat, the entire press of the Philippines was against the
collective principle, and when I say press, I refer specially to the so-called independent papers.
and yet the country declared itself in favor of Collectivism, and such is the force of the
avalanche that the Unipersonalists are afraid to own that they are what they say.
The question now is: after the acceptance and inclusion of the collective theory in the
Nacionalista platform, should we remain in the party? I have given this subject much thought. I
spent sleepless nights pondering over it and this I say in all the seriousness that step such as the
one were taking deserves. There are those who believe and affirm that personal ambition and
personal interest are the main consideration in the fight. They said that the one who will head it
is there, because he wants to scale the heights of power, and that those who follow him do it not
because of principles, but for personal convenience. In all sincerity I want to tell you now that
249
lest our action be translated in that thwarted way, and there are many who are interested in
presenting it thus, I tried my very best to prevent the splot because I do not want that political
struggles in this country should be taken as animated by personal motives.
Listen to this: The politician who does not have any patriotic purpose but his personal
aggrandizement in entering politics, who is only after personal convenience and nothing else is
surely after a job, a position. Can I find a position in the Philippine Government and in the gift of
the Filipino people higher than that of President of the Senate, the highest position to which a
Filipino could be sent by his countrymen? If I wanted to perpetuate myself in power, is there
anything better for me than to remain in the Nacionalista Party?
But no! I prefer to take the risky side. I prefer to be in a new party that must be organized, that
will mean sacrifice, work, fight. And the same is true with those who are with mr. There is
nothing more comfortable for them than to remain a powerful party to ensure their victory at the
polls. But they sustain a principle. They are fighting for their conviction, not for their
convenience. One should not belong to a party only to occupy a position so that he may better
defend the ideals of the party by means of his position.
There are no bad feelings against our former colleagues of the Nacionalista Party. We harbor
no grudge against them. We give them the same affection. There is no reason in the world why
we cannot consider ourselves as brothers. Unless they consider that only who belong to one party
can be called brothers, and if that is their conception of unity on a party, I say that is destructive,
suicidal. It is not the unity of the party that should be sought. It should rather he the unity of the
people. Partisan struggles should never involve bad feelings and personal hatred. We can and we
should remain as we have been, the brothers that we are.
What a beautiful spectacle for the country to behold political fights limited to discussion of
principles eliminating personalities! What a magnificent spectacle for the people to see political
opponents eating on the same banquet tables, united by the same links of affection and
friendship! Much as I regret it, this seems to be something unknown yet here. Everytime that the
people saw the Speaker and myself together, immediately the talk goes the rounds that our
political differences have been patched up. When we had toasted each other at a banquet in the
Ayuntamiento. All the papers said there was peace between the two, not knowing that the next
day a big bomb is going to explode.
People may ask why it is that this break only takes place now. The reason is simple. When the
Nacionalista Party was organized, it was an organization with the sole purpose of coordinating
the forces of the country together for Philippine Independence. It was not called upon to solve
political, social, economic matters. All the Filipinos affiliated as Nacionalistas; in time the
Nacionalista Party came into power. It found itself then confronted by political, social, and
economic problems. It was invested with legislative power. From that time on differences in
250
opinion began to spring up. You must have noticed that our Senate is liberal and our Lower
House, conservative. This is the only country where such a phenomenon takes places with the
exception of Australia. The reason is simple and it needs no further comment. That fact exists.
There are two tendencies, the conservative and the liberal, and it is for the welfare of the country
that there should be two parties organized and based on those opposing tendencies.
Laws do not make a government democratic or autocratic or have autocratic laws and have
democratic government. We have England for example where there is a king and it is a
monarchy, yet the workings of its government are democratic. And we have: on the other hand
some Latin American countries where their government can be summarized in three points: 1.
The government resides in the people; 2. The people delegate their power to a President; 3. The
President does what he pleases.
I want to tell you, gentlemen, that we have done all that we could to avoid this split. Our
efforts failed, the Collectivists believe that union in a party does not mean union of men. It
means unity in principles professed and practised. We believe that the organization of a new
party does not mean the bankruptcy of our National cause, because we hold the Nacionalista
Party is not the people. Even if there is a split, we shall work together for our complete political
emancipation. We have faith in our people, blind, sublime faith in them and we know that no
Filipino will be recreant to the legacy bequeathed to him by his forefathers and that all of us to a
man will stand in favor of Philipppine Independence, immediate, absolute and complete. We
know that the Filipino people, irrespective of party, creed, or religion, will force the issue and
compel all party men to work for the realization of our sacred ideals.
We divided, but divided in ideas, united in sentiment, united in love of country, divided in the
procedure of serving her best. The Unipersonalists are antiquarians: the Collectivists are
modern. Even if I wanted to remain in the party, I cannot very well do it. For it would be like
mixing oil and water in a glass. We shall need a new house now that we leave our old one. Now
we have two strong parties that our hope shall fight ideals and ideals alone, eliminating
personalities.
251
Speech of Senate President Manuel Quezon accepting his nomination as President of the
Philippines, July 20, 1935.
Source:https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1935/07/20/speech-of-senate-president-manuel
quezon-accepting-his-nomination-as-president-of-the-philippines/
This excerpt is from the speech delivered by Manuel L. Quezon, who was serving as then Senate
President in June 1935, and accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines by his
political party, Nacionalista Party. His running mate, then Senator Sergio Osmena. Both Quezon
and Osmena were rivals in securing the passage of a law in the US Congress for Philippine
Independence. Quezon eventually won. He defeated former President Emilio Aguinaldo and
bishop Gregorio Aglipay of the Philippine Independent Catholic Church in the elections held in
September of the same year.
His speech provided his platform of governance and key programs pertaining to issues such as
economy, education, infrastructure, relations with the United States, foreign relations, and
independence. This excerpt shows the issues on administration of justice and social problems,
warning that these issues may be used to stir-up discontent among the masses. This issue of
social unrest and discontent among the masses was evidently seen in the Sakdal uprising that
year.
Speech
of
Senate President Manuel L. Quezon
Accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines
[Delivered on July 20, 1935]
Mr. CHAIRMAN, GENTLEMEN OF THE COMMITTEE, FELLOW-CITIZENS:
It is with a profound sense of gratitude that I received in the presence of this vast multitude the
formal notification of my nomination for the Presidency of the Commonwealth. A party
nomination for the highest office within the gift of the people is in itself a great distinction, but
when the nomination comes under such auspicious circumstances as have attended that which is
now proffered to me, I regard it as the greatest honor that can be accorded to any public man
short alone of his actual election to the Presidency.
Ever since the approval and acceptance of the Independence Act there has been growing among
the people a feeling of deepest concern over the difficult problems and impending
responsibilities which will confront us upon the inauguration of the Commonwealth. While the
252
Constitutional Convention was in session, partly fostered by the spirit of national solidarity
exhibited by the members of that body, the anxiety to prepare the country adequately to meet
these problems and responsibilities became articulate in an increasingly popular demand for
national unity, that political parties give pause to partisan strife, that the leaders of the vital forces
of the nation join in their efforts for the attainment of the common goal, and that the entire
country resolve to support loyally the man who may be entrusted with the national leadership so
that through the Government of the Commonwealth the foundations of the future Philippine
Republic may be solidly and firmly established.
Resolutions were passed by municipal councils as well as by civic and social organizations,
including labor unions, demanding a coalition of the two great political parties as the most
practical means of obtaining this unity of effort. Before the Constitutional Convention adjourned
the cry of national unity was taken up by the League of Provincial Governors Without regard to
party affiliation and voicing the prevailing sentiment in their respective provinces, these
spokesmen of our local governments unanimously joined in the general appeal for unity.
Lastly, prominent Filipino business men, professionals and leaders in agriculture, industry, and
labor formally submitted to the directorate of the two political parties a concrete proposal that the
two parties nominate jointly the candidates for President and Vice President and thus insure the
cooperation of all the vital forces of the nation during the first and trying the years of the
Commonwealth. When the two parties held their respective national conventions they readily
responded to this popular clamor and forthwith agreed to form a coalition and to nominate the
same candidates for President and Vice President.
Neither Senator Osmeña nor I sought these nominations. We made no preconvention campaign
nor did we have any desire to secure them. We entered public life about the same time thirty
years ago both pledged to the cause of independence. The vicissitudes which have been our lot
during these years are not now to be recounted but as I look back upon our joint efforts in the
attainment of the goal which we set out before us I feel happy that at the end of the long struggle
we can face our people standing on the same platform, our pledge fulfilled, our mutual friendship
and regard enhanced, and still enjoying, I hope, their continued confidence and support.
With the approval of the Independence Act and its acceptance by the country we believed that
our extended public service could at last come to an end. We would have been content as private
citizens to lend our unstinted support to the new Government. But it seems that our fellow
citizens have once again chosen to place upon our shoulders the new responsibility of organizing
the Commonwealth and leading the nation during the early years of its existence. The nomination
that has been proffered to us attains the category of a call to duty which no public-spirited citizen
may evade or disregard. I, therefore, Mr. Chairman, make public announcement that I accept the
nomination for the Presidency which has been tendered to me, deeming it my bounden duty to do
so, and I accept it with the most profound sense of the responsibility that it entails and the
deepest feeling of gratitude.
253
Having been nominated under the circumstances I have mentioned, I cannot afford to speak in
uncertain terms. The need of the hour is for fixed orientation, clear statement of policies, and a
definition of the national purposes. In the course of the present campaign I shall have the
opportunity to discuss all the important questions before the country. For the present I have to
limit myself to a few of them.
THE PLATFORM
The Coalition platform meets with my wholehearted approval. I took part in the drafting of that
document and I make my own every commitment contained therein.
THE CONSTITUTION
I look upon the Constitution of the Philippines as the expression of the sovereignty and of the
aggregate will of the Filipino people. I shall abide by its provisions. I shall uphold the democratic
principle underlying the institutions that it establishes. I am opposed to a dictatorship. I maintain
that no man who believes in a dictatorship can with safety be entrusted with the reins of
executive power under our Constitution. Democracy can only survive if those at the helm of the
Government believe in the people’s right to rule and have faith in their inherent capacity to
decide rightly important public questions.
I will hold inviolate and will defend to the utmost the individual rights and liberties. I shall
safeguard free speech, the freedom of the press, and the equality of every man before the law
however poor or ignorant. I shall insure for every citizen of the Philippines, from Luzon to
Mindanao and Sulu, the right to worship God as his own conscience dictates.
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH
We are entering a new era. We are on the threshold of free nationhood. The Government of the
Commonwealth that we shall establish derives its powers from a constitution approved by the
people themselves. It may truly be said that it is a government of our creation to be administered
for our own welfare.
Except in a few specified cases, it will be free from American control in the conduct of domestic
affairs. Only in our foreign relations do we remain subject to American supervision, and this
because of the continuing responsibility of the foreign aggression during the life of the
Commonwealth. Hence, the Government of the Commonwealth will be, in fact not in name, an
independent government under the protection of the United States.
The immediate task before us is to set up the new Government,–a task that will require all the
foresight, the wisdom, and the courage of the people. Then we must adopt such measures as will
insure the stability of our national economy, and provide for the honest and efficient
administration of the affairs of the government. Equally important is to make adequate provision
for the defense of our country against external aggression or internal disorders.
254
I favor a simple and economical government, one in keeping with the limited resources of our
country but which is capable of ministering to the needs of the nations.
I shall be unsparing in my efforts to carry out the mandate of the Constitution regarding the civil
service. Merit and character alone will be the qualification for office or promotion. For the
highest responsible posts I shall call on the most capable, honest, and patriotic citizens,
regardless of political affiliation or religious belief. This is no time for placing party
considerations above the common weal. In fact, one of the main purposes of the coalition is to
secure the cooperation and help of the best available men to insure the success of the
Commonwealth. I shall tolerate neither corruption nor inefficiency in public office.
FINANCIAL POLICY
The financial stability of the Government depends upon our ability to keep expenses within our
income. At the time when other governments are resorting to loans in order to meet their
obligations we can take pride in the fact that we have been able to maintain a balanced budget.
Under our Constitution the responsibility for maintaining a balanced budget falls mainly upon
the executive. I pledge myself to maintain the credit of the Government and at all times to
balance the budget and keep our finances in a sound condition.
I shall keep our present currency system in all its integrity and will allow no change that will
affect its value. If new conditions should require such a change it will be done only after the most
careful study and consultation with competent experts. For the present I can see no reason for
any radical modification in our monetary system.
TAXATION
Irresponsible demagogues have tried to arouse in the hearts of our people the hope that under an
independent Philippines there shall be no taxes except upon the rich. It is my duty to warn the
credulous against such misrepresentation Governments can be supported only through taxation.
It is a primary duty of citizens to contribute to the support of the Government, but taxation that
does not take into consideration the relative financial ability of the taxpayer is unjust. I favor a
complete revision of our Astern of taxation with the best technical advice available. I advocate
that the burdens of the state be equitably disputed in proportion to the means and possibilities of
the taxpayer. We shall make a general reduction of the assessed value of real property in
accordance with present prices.
PUBLIC WORKS
The so-called pork barrel system, as known in the United States and as sometimes practiced in
the Philippines, must definitely be discarded. It is a waste of public funds. I am in favor of
continuing the building of roads and schools, in accordance with a carefully-prepared plan to be
followed systematically in the order of their relative importance to the general public.
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION
255
I stand by the educational policy enunciated in the Constitution. The principle underlying this
policy is the training for useful, well-disciplined, self sacrificing citizenship that draws its breath
of life from Filipino patriotism. Our system of education should be revised so as to accomplish
that aim still more effectively. The State is in duty bound to maintain a complete and adequate
system of public education, providing at least free public primary instruction and citizenship
training to adult citizens.
My attention will be especially devoted to making it possible for every child to go to school.
Adult citizenship training will be carried out in accordance with a broad and systematic plan. To
the end that poverty may not prevent gifted young men and women from developing their talent,
the Government should create the largest possible number of scholarships for them in all
branches of learning. Our educational objective should fit in with our economic policy. I am for
greater emphasis on vocational and agricultural training in the intermediate and high schools, but
the instruction should always be in keeping with the economic conditions of each region and of
the country as a whole.
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
An independent judiciary administering justice without fear or favor promptly and impartially to
rich and poor alike is the strongest bulwark of individual rights and the best guaranty against
oppression and usurpation from any source. Equally important is the maintenance of the
confidence of the people in the courts. I will appoint no man to the bench without having
satisfied myself, after a thorough investigation, of his character and ability.
To strengthen the faith of the common people in our courts, it is necessary that the utmost care be
exerted in the selection of justices of the peace. These courts are often the only tribunals
accessible to the larger portion of our population and it is essential that they be maintained
Worthy of their confidence. If the disinherited cannot obtain redress of their grievances or
vindication of their rights in these courts, they have no further recourse, for the Courts of First
Instance and the Supreme Court are often beyond their reach. By the impartiality and integrity of
the justices of the peace, therefore, the judiciary of the Philippines is judged by the millions of
our countrymen who live in the barrios and distant places. I pledge myself to do everything in
my power to maintain these courts free from political or other extraneous influence and to
appoint thereto only men of proven ability and integrity and of the broadest human sympathies.
SOCIAL PROBLEMS
The welfare of the people should be the concern of the Government. The helpless and the needy,
the jobless, as well as the workers in the factories and in the field have a claim upon the
Government to safeguard their health and well-being. The contentment of the masses is the first
insurance against social and political disorders. It is the duty of the Government to protect the
working men against social and political disorders. It is the duty and exploitation to secure to
them fair wages and return for their labor.
256
Let us beware of men who deliberately, for political or selfish aims, stir up discontent among the
masses. They preach subversive doctrines, speak of evils and abuses that do not exits, or magnify
those which often are inevitable in democracies. These men are those worse enemies of society,
more dangerous to the community than ordinary criminals. They have no sympathy for the
people, but are mere self-seekers, intent only in securing either pecuniary or political advantage
for themselves. If as a result of their preaching disorders occur, they cowardly disclaim all
responsibility for that which none other than themselves had brought about. He who tries to carry
favor with the masses by appealing to the passions of the people, stirring up their prejudices, or
capitalizing discontent or human suffering, is unworthy of public trust.
LANDED ESTATES
The ownership of big landed estates by corporations or absentee landlords have invariably
caused discontent and unrest among the tenants or occupants of such estates. The discontent
among the tenants of the Friar lands contributed to the causes which led to the rebellion against
Spain. Those Friar lands have been acquired by the Government and sold in small lots but there
are still a few large haciendas particularly in Luzon that are the hotbeds of discontent and unrest
among their tenants. Not only for the sake of these tenants, but also in the interest of peace, every
effort should be made to acquire these haciendas, at a fair and just price to be sold in small lots to
the tenants.
There are complaints in certain places that the tenants are the victims of unfair practices on the
part of their landlords. These abuses must be stopped and the tenant protected in his rights.
LABOR
Fortunately for our country, we have had no sharp cleavages between labor and capital. Strikes
have been few and far-between, and they have never been long-drawn-out or general. That we
have so far been spared the extremities of class warfare, is no proof that we shall forever be
exempt. Our good fortune should rather teach us to seek the means to preserve the country
against such conflicts by the only method which experience has shown to be effective; namely,
by taking steps designed to prevent the exploitation and oppression of the working men and thus
assure their happiness and contentment.
Filipino laborers, compared to those of other oriental countries, receive higher wages and are
much better protected in their rights by legislation. We have enacted many laws protecting labor.
In all earnestness, however, I must say that we must go further in this direction. The experience
of centuries shows that the one sure way to Protect society against class war is to secure to wage
earners their due.
I am against communism. I am a firm believer in the institution of private property. I contend,
however, that whenever property rights come in conflict with human rights, the former should
yield to the latter.
257
If we would preserve the institution of private property, we must hold fast to this principle, in the
determination of conflicting rights between man and man. It is thus that we may draw the line
between the rights of labor and capital and erect an economic structure based on the Principle
that human life is the measure of all other values, that considerations of possession and profit
must give way to the supremacy of human existence.
CAPITAL
A change in the political status of a country always gives rise to fear and misgivings. Not only
among Americans and foreigners, but even among a few Filipinos, the impending political
changes have caused anxiety as to the future.
There is no justification for these fears. I give assurance that peace, order, law and justice will
reign supreme under the Commonwealth, and that the rights of foreigners and nationals alike will
be safeguarded. Existing investments, whether foreign or national, will receiver every
inducement to stay, and outside capital will be welcomed. We especially desire that new
American capital should come and help in the development of the country.
NATIONAL DEFENSE
I believe in the efficacy of the instrumentalities of peace, such as the League of Nations or
treaties of neutrality. In due time we should apply for admission o the League and urge the
negotiation of a multilateral treaty for the neutralization of the Philippines. However, we cannot
ignore present-day realities. We cannot rely exclusively on these implements of peace for our
national defense.
I favor preparedness for national defense. We cannot afford to have, nor do I approve of, a large
standing army or costly military establishments, but we must have a regular army of sufficient
size for our requirements and a trained citizenry ready to be drafted into service in any
emergency. For the proper planning of our defenses and organization and training of our regular
and citizen army I shall secure the best expert advice.
OUR RELATIONS WITH AMERICA
It should be our constant endeavor to maintain the most friendly relations and closest
collaboration with the United States. We owe much to America and we are grateful to her. Our
present economy is tied up with the free American market. Many of our industries depend for
their existence on our reciprocal free trade relations with the United States, and we should try to
maintain these trade relations if possible, even after independence. I shall spare no effort to
obtain the elimination of the export tax provided in the Independence Law. I shall work for the
repeal of the excise tax on coconut oil. I shall endeavor to take such action as may be required to
place our trade relations with the United States on a truly reciprocal basis, so that they may be
continued after independence for the mutual advantage of both countries.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
258
As already stated, our foreign relations will be under the control and supervision of the United
States during the Commonwealth; but there is nothing in the Independence Act which prevents
the Commonwealth from beginning to lay the foundations for our future relations with foreign
nations. Indeed, the period of transition having been provided t give to the Filipino people time
to prepare themselves for the responsibilities of an independent government, it can be rightly
assumed that the United States meant to give us the opportunity, under the Commonwealth of
initiating both political as well as trade relations with other countries, subject to its supervision
and control.
We shall request the State Department at Washington to permit the Commonwealth to send men
as attaches to American legations or embassies as well as to American consulates in order that
these men may acquire the knowledge and experience in the diplomatic service and provide our
government with needed information concerning foreign trade.
It will be necessary and to our advantage besides to win the good-will of, and maintain friendly
relations with, other nations. But to accomplish this aim, mere protestations of good purposes are
not enough. We must deal fairly with all nations and respect their rights. We must secure to every
foreigner who lives with us full protection of our laws. His life, his property, must be as safe
among us as they are in his own land.
During the transition period we shall endeavor to find new markets for our products so that if and
when the market of the United States shall no longer be open to us except on a competitive basis,
we may not be left without outlet for our products.
PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE
The question of Philippine Independence has been settled. The Independence Law sets the day
for independence and prescribes the process leading to its consummation. We accepted the
Independence Law, we have approved a Constitution pursuant to its provisions, and the people
by ratifying it with practical unanimity have agree to the grant of independence under the terms
and conditions prescribed by the Congress. Independence, therefore, is no longer an issue either
in the United States or in the Philippines. Insofar as the terms and conditions of independence are
concerned, we made it plain when we accepted the Independence Law that we reserved the right
to petition Congress for their modification with a view to making them less burdensome for our
people and more adapted to the attainment of the purpose for which Congress intended them.
We consider the economic provisions of the Independence Law not entirely fair to the
Philippines. We regard legislation recently passed by Congress imposing greater restrictions on
our free imports to the United States or authorizing the collection of exorbitant taxes on some of
our products sold in that country, not only discriminatory, but a virtual violation of the solemn
covenant between the two countries We shall exert every effort to secure the repeal of hose
discriminatory measures and to obtain amendments to the Independence Law looking to a more
equitable trade arrangement between the United States and the Philippines during the
Commonwealth.
259
In relation to the transition period, the Congress of the United States fixed the term of ten years
considering it necessary to allow the Philippines gradually to adjust their national economy to the
conditions which will obtain when independence should eventuate and to permit the Filipinos to
prepare themselves adequately for the responsibilities of independent nationhood. It was,
therefore, chiefly for the benefit of the Philippines, rather than of the United States that the
intermediate period of ten years was fixed. While there may be differences of opinion as to
whether this period is too long or too short all must agree that if our trade relations with the
United States during the Commonwealth should prove more injurious to our country than they
would under complete independence, the Philippines would then do well to hasten the date of
separation from America. This fact will not be revealed to us until after the first years of the
Commonwealth and we have known the result of the economic conference between
representatives of the United States and the Philippines which, I trust, will be called by the
President of the United States at an early date.
Meanwhile, I consider it a most disturbing influence which will retard our work of economic
readjustment and reconstruction, for anyone to advocate now the shortening of the transition
period. What the country direly needs to-day is a period of stability and business confidence so
that we may proceed unhampered in the task of erecting our new Government and building up
the national economy to increase the wealth of the nation, promote commerce, agriculture, and
industry; improve the condition of our wage-earners, and create economic opportunities for all
our citizens. We need to give capital reasonable certainty as to those conditions which affect
investment; we need to assure the industries that are dependent upon the free American market
that no radical changes will take place which will bring about a sudden loss of the market on
which they depend; we need above all to provide economic security for the masses of our people
which can only be accomplished through the maintenance of stable business conditions.
