United States. High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 1941. Annual Report of the
United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands Commissioner to the Philippine
Islands Covering the Calendar Year 1941. Washington: U.S. G.P.O. Accessed December 4,
2020. https://archive.org/details/annualreportofun4041unit/page/112/mode/2up
Prior to the Japanese occupation, several documents from the U.S. government and the
Philippine Commonwealth had written on the conditions of preparedness in the Philippines
should the Second World War encroach the Pacific. The US High Commissioner to the
Philippines included in his reports the wartime preparations in various aspects such as public
safety, relief and refuge from the attacks that would eventually ensue. Treatment from injuries in
the several attacks during the wartime became difficulty due to the scarcity of resources such as
medicine and other supplies.
The excerpt below is taken from a section on public safety and health which were among several
wartime instructions to armed forces and civilian troops. It highlighted the role of the Philippine
Red Cross to be in-charge of first-aid units during the attacks. These instructions from the
government show the immediate treatments during bombs as well as decontamination
instructions from chemicals that was obtained in these attacks.
EXCERPT:
FIRST-AID UNITS
First-aid units will be organized on the basis of four persons and one automobile with
driver to each party. Two ambulances with drivers and two attendants for each ambulance will
form an integral part of such units. Where regular ambulances are not available, they should be
improvised from suitable motor vehicles in the locality. A sufficient number of these units will be
organized in each com- munity so as to provide a minimum of one such unit to each 3,000 of
population or major fraction thereof.
The Philippine Red Cross will be responsible for the organization and training of all first
aid units.
The instruction of such units should include the treatment of shock, hemmorrhage,
fractures, unconsciousness, suffocation, electric shock, and burns and scalds, as contained in the
usual first-aid course of instruction. In addition to this, instructions must be given in the proper
treatment of gas casualties. Such instructions are briefly summarized below :
308
Localized areas of contamination on the body caused by blister gas (mustard) should be
treated by removing the blister gas from the skin by using gasoline, alcohol, or naphtha as
a solvent. To apply these solvents a small piece of cotton batting should be held between
the finger and the thumb, only the end of it being dipped in the solvent. Rubber gloves, if
available, should be worn while applying the sol- vent. It is important to avoid spreading
the blister gas by rubbing or using an excess of solvent. Solvents only remove the blister
gas — they do not destroy it. For this reason a succession of swabs should be used, and
the contaminated swabs burnt or buried. If the above solvents are not readily available,
the affected part should be thoroughly washed with soap and water. In all cases where
there has been contamination it is advisable for the casualty to be washed completely
with soap and water, in addition to the solvent treatment described above for the affected
part. It must be emphasized that the success of any method of preventive treatment
depends upon the promptness with which it is applied.
Lung Irritant Gas
Whether symptoms are present or not, any person who has been ex- posed to a lung
irritant gas must, from the outset, be spared any further exertion. He must be kept lying
down and be protected from chill. He should be removed as a stretcher case.
Eye Irritant Gas
Face the wind with the eyes open. Do not rub the eyes under any circumstances. If it is
available, wash the eyes with a weak solution of boric acid. First-aid stations for the
treatment of ambulatory cases will be established in each community. The personnel and
equipment for these stations will be trained and furnished by the Philippine Red Cross.
These stations will be located in such places and in such numbers as not to require an
injured person to walk any great distance. Existing hospitals will be expanded, and
buildings suitable for hospitals will be selected for use as hospitals whenever present
facilities are inadequate. The Philippine Red Cross is responsible for the determination of
the adequacy of existing facilities and for arranging for their expansion where deemed
necessary. The Philippine Red Cross is also responsible for the securing of additional
buildings suitable for hospitals whenever present facilities prove inadequate^ Doctors,
nurses, hospital attendants and other personnel will be procured by the Philippine Red
Cross.
RESCUE UNITS
309
In each municipality rescue units will be formed whose duties are to rescue persons trapped in
fallen buildings and in debris from such buildings. Each unit will consist of a leader and eight
men, all of whom will be recruited from men skilled in the building trades. Rescue work requires
a special knowledge of the method of handling and storing up debris in order to prevent injury to
the persons being rescued and to the members of the rescue units. Rescue units will be organized
by, trained by, and operate under, the district and city engineers. One such unit will be organized
for each 6,000 of population or major fraction thereof. Tools and equipment for the use of these
units will be provided by the local authorities.
DEMOLITION AND REPAIR UNITS
Units to handle demolitions and repair will, be organized in each community. The duties of such
units are to clear streets of their wreckage, fill bomb craters, assist when necessary in the repair
of damaged water and gas mains, sewers, electric transmission lines, etc. They also will
cooperate with fire-fighting units when it becomes necessary to use explosives on or otherwise
demolish structures in order to prevent the spread of fire and to bring a fire under control. The
personnel of these units should be recruited from persons skilled in construction work, the
handling and use of explosives, street and highway repair, and general utilities repair and
maintenance. These units will be organized by, trained by, and operate under, the district and city
engineers. The strength and composition of each unit and the number of units in each locality
will be determined by the district or city engineer after consideration of the installations to be
maintained in each case.
DECONTAMINATION UNITS
Units formed for the purpose of decontaminating areas in which poisoned gas has been used will
be organized in each community under the direction of district and city engineers. Each unit will
consist of a leader and six men. One unit will be formed for each 5,000 of population or major
portion thereof. While such units should be trained in the approved methods of decontaminating
gassed areas, they also should be trained to assist in rescue, demolition, or repair work. The first
step taken by these units will be to work out, with danger signs and barriers, the contaminated
areas. No unauthorized persons should be allowed to enter these areas. Decontamination work
should then begin promptly. The following materials may be used for decontaminating work:
a. Earth. Earth, sand, ashes, or sawdust may be spread over a contaminated area to
provide temporary protection. The layer of covering material should be at least 3
inches thick and will be much more effective if wet down with water. The
310
chemical used in the gas is not destroyed by this procedure but the covering layer
will prevent the escape of further poisonous vapors.
b. Water. Some gases are readily decomposed by water, and a liberal wetting of the
contaminated area is sufficient to destroy them. With some gases such as mustard,
water has no neutralizing effect. Therefore, even long after an area has been
washed with water it is dangerous to sit or lie down therein. If practicable, the
area should be covered with a 3-inch layer of earth, sand, or ashes. Whenever it is
available, chloride of lime should be used as indicated below.
c. Chloride of lime. This is a white powder which readily gives up its chlorine
content when exposed to the air or moisture. It should be kept in air-tight
containers and used immediately after removal from them. It combines quickly
with blister gases (mustard) and if it is mixed with sand or earth no violent
reaction will occur. The proportions should be about one part of chloride of lime
to three parts of sand or earth. One pound of chloride of lime is required for each
square yard of gassed area. In decontaminating machinery, woodwork of
buildings, etc., chloride of lime generally can be more easily and effectively
applied in liquid form with rags, swabs, or brushes. The solution used should
consist of one part of chloride of lime to one part of hot water.
d. Fire. An area covered with high dry grass or brush may be decontaminated by
burning it, provided this can be done without danger to nearby personnel or
property. The heat in many instances will cause a heavy cloud of mustard vapor to
be given off down-wind during the burning.
311
Vargas, Jorge. Report of Philippine (Executive Commission) to the Director, J.M.A. Jorge B.
Manila: 1943
As the designated executive secretary of President Laurel, Vargas was tasked to create annual
reports on the activities of the Philippine Government to the Imperial Japanese forces. This
report of the Executive Committee consists of activities ranging from economic programs to
address scarcity of resources to wartime propaganda through public instruction and cultural
activities
The excerpt below shows the efforts by the provisional government to use education and public
instruction for propaganda. These areas included the expansive utilization of Japanese and
Filipino as languages as the provisional government. Cultural activities such as lectures from
different experts on Filipino and Japanese culture and propaganda films were also used to spread
the idea of the wider imperial vision of Japan, the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere to
Filipinos.
EXCERPT:
For the purpose of giving spiritual and intellectual reorientation to ranking employees in the
different bureaus and offices, a government employees training institute was organized on
October 15, 1943, and the first term of training was started on October 19, 1942. The
Supervision of the Institute was placed under the Executive Secretary to the Commission and its
administration under the Chief of the Civil Service.
During the first term, October 19 to December 14, 1942, 199 trainees were enrolled; during the
second term, January 10 to March 15, 1945, a total of 395 employees were graduated.
The curriculum of instruction approved for the Institute and consisting of the following studies
was carefully followed: General Information Concerning Japan; Public Service Administration;
Japanese Language; Philippine Culture; Music Japanese and Filipino songs; Physical culture;
and Lectures on various topics to the New Order, the intentions of Nippon in waging the Greater
East Asia War, the development of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, the establishment
of the New Philippines, and others. To supplement the regular classroom instruction there was
provided a series of lectures by prominent and distinguished Nipponese and Filipino government
officials and scholars, moving pictures shows consisting of both recreational and instructional
files.
312
“Letter of President Quezon to Douglas MacArthur, February 20, 1942.” Official Gazette.
https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1942/02/20/letter-of-president-quezon-to-douglas
macarthur-february-20-1942/
During the war, President Manuel L. Quezon along with his several key official of the Philippine
Commonwealth fled from the Philippines and remained in the United States until 1944. Quezon
executed most of his duties and responsibilities as president.
Below is his letter to General Douglas MacArthur, the head of the United States Army Forces in
the Far East. It contains personal words to General McArthur written in personal correspondence
beyond his issuance of Executive Order No. I, series of 1942, which appointed General
MacArthur as the Military Adviser of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.
EXCERPT:
Fort Mills, P.I.
February 20, 1942
My dear General MacArthur:
Although I have given official recognition to the services you have rendered to the government
of the Commonwealth and to the Filipino people in my Executive Order No. I, series of 1942, I
feel that I must write you this letter, which partakes of an official as well as private character, in
order to tell you how grateful I am, my own family, and the members of my whole staff for the
kindness and generosity with which we have been treated here; and to ask you to convey to all
the officers within your command, particularly to General Moore, our deep gratitude.
As I have already told you, I would have remained here to the very bitter end, if you deemed it
necessary for me to stay. I am going only because you and I have agreed that the cause for which
we are fighting can be best promoted by my being in the unoccupied territory where I could
render you help and assistance by keeping up the morale and determination of my people to
stand by America. But I am leaving you with a weeping heart, for you and I have not only been
friends and comrades; we have been more than brothers. My thoughts will always be with you
and your dear wife and my godson. If better days should come to all of us, as I hope they will, I
expect that the memory of these hectic days will strengthen our friendship and cooperation even
more. I am leaving my own boys, the Filipino soldiers, under your care. I know that you will
look after their welfare and safety and that, above all, you will see to it that their names may go
down in history as loyal and brave soldiers.
313
With my love to you, Jean and the boy, in which all my family joins, I say good-bye till we meet
again. May God ever keep you under His protection.
Sincerely yours,
(Sgd.) Manuel Quezon
“Message of General MacArthur to the Filipino people, January 1, 1946.” Official Gazette.
https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1946/01/01/message-of-douglas-macarthur-to-the
filipino-people-january-1-1946/
Douglas MacArthur was the head of the United States Army Forces in the Far East or USAFFE
from 1941 to 1946. In the Philippines during the Second World War, President Quezon appointed
General MacArthur as the Military Adviser of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. MacArthur
led the efforts for the defense of the Philippines at the onset of the Pacific War in 1941. Upon the
defeat of US and Philippine forces in the early year of the war, he escaped the Philippines in
1942, and continued with efforts to defend Allied Forces in the Asia-Pacific.
In July 1944, MacArthur returned in the Philippines in the landing of Leyte Gulf, where he is
quoted to have said, “I have returned,” one of his wartime promises to head the efforts liberate
the Philippines from the Japanese forces. Below is his message to the Filipino people towards the
end of the Second World War.
EXCERPT:
Message
of
General Douglas MacArthur
Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers
To the Filipino People
[Released on January 1, 1946]
Tokyo, 1946
To the Filipino People:
With the dawn of a new year—a year of peace following the ravage of war—I send you from
Tokyo a message of my enduring affection. I can never forget the courage, the determination and
the unity with which you fought your way to victory.
Confronted with the pressing problems of building anew amid the ruins left in war’s wake, and at
the same time entering upon your destiny as a member of the Nations of the World, you face a
314
task the magnitude of which demands the dedication of all of your faith and all of your strength
as a people.
Move forward to meet this challenge of the future as magnificently as you met that of the past.
With continued help of Almighty God, in this noble purpose, I know you will not fail.
DOUGLAS MACARTHUR
“Message of President Osmeña to the Filipino people on V-J Day, September 2, 1945.”
Official Gazette. https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1945/09/02/statement-of-president
osmena-to-the-filipino-people-on-v-j-day-september-2-1945/
Sergio Osmeña Sr. was the second President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, who
succeeded Manuel L. Quezon in 1944. President Osmeña accompanied U.S. General Douglas
MacArthur, several ranking officers in the U.S. forces and key officials in Philippine
Commonwealth in the liberation of the Philippines. Among his key priorities were the
reorganization of the government and rehabilitation after war.
The document below shows the message of President Osmeña to mark the Victory over Japanese
Day or V-J Day after the surrender of the Japanese Empire to the Allied Forces.
EXCERPT:
Message of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña
President of the Philippines To the Filipino People on V-J Day
[Released on September 2, 1945]
With the formal surrender of the Japanese Empire today, September 2, 1945, the long and terrible
war is at an end. President Truman, speaking on behalf of all the United Nations, has proclaimed
this day as V-J Day.
The surrender of Japan marks the turning point for us and for the peoples of all the United
Nations.
Our effort has been devoted toward the paramount task of winning the war. Today the task is
done. We must now devote ourselves to the task of winning the peace.
On the indestructible democratic foundations laid under the tutelage of America we must
reconstruct and build. The rehabilitation of our country demands all our energies.
We must prepare for the independence which will soon be ours and, as members of the family of
nations, we must work with other peoples in the effort to assure the peace and welfare of
humanity. For our people we may hope to achieve a greater and lasting happiness.
Today is a day of thanksgiving in the flush of victory. It should also be a day of dedication to the
heavy tasks that lie before us.
315
“Instrument of Surrender of the Japanese and Japanese-Controlled Armed Forces in the
Philippine Islands to the Commanding General United States Army Forces, Western
Pacific” Lillian Goldman Law Library. Yale University Accessed December 4, 2020. https://
avalon.law.yale.edu/wwii/j6.asp
Tomoyuki Yamashita was a Japanese general of the Imperial Japanese Armey assigned to areas
mostly in Southeast Asia. After being deployed to Malaya and Singapore, he was assigned to
defend the Philippines from the Allied forces in 1944. Under his command, the Japanese army
committed atrocities, some of which were basis for the U.S. Supreme Court's 1946 decision to
execute him.
The document below shows the surrender of Yamahista to US Major General Edmond H. Leavy.
Even after the formal surrender of Japan in August 1945, he was able to hold on to part of Luzon
in September 1944.
EXCERPT:
INSTRUMENT OF SURRENDER
of the Japanese and Japanese-Controlled Armed Forces in the Philippine
Islands to the Commanding General United States Army Forces, Western
Pacific
Camp John Hay
Baguio, Mountain Province,
Luzon, Philippine, Islands
3 September, 1945
Pursuant to and in accordance with the proclamation of the Emperor of Japan accepting the terms
set forth in the declaration issued by the heads of the Governments of the United States, Great
Britain, and China on 26 July 1945; at Potsdam and subsequently adhered to by the Union of
316
Soviet Socialist Republics; and to the formal instrument of surrender of the Japanese Imperial
Government and the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters signed at Tokyo Bay at 0908 on 2
September 1945:
1. Acting by command of and in behalf of the Emperor of Japan, the Japanese Imperial
Government and the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters, We hereby surrender
unconditionally to the Commanding General, United States Army Forces, Western Pacific, all
Japanese and Japanese-controlled armed forces, air, sea, ground and auxiliary, in the Philippine
Islands.
2. We hereby command all Japanese forces wherever situated in the Philippine Islands to cease
hostilities forthwith, to preserve and save from damage all ships, aircraft, and military and civil
property, and to comply with all requirements which may be imposed by the Commanding
General, United States Army Forces, Western Pacific, or his authorized representatives.
3. We hereby direct the commanders of all Japanese forces in the Philippine Islands to issue at
once to all forces under their command to surrender unconditionally themselves and all forces
under their control, as prisoners of war, to the nearest United States Force Commander.
4. We hereby direct the commanders of all Japanese forces in the Philippine Islands to surrender
intact and in good order to the nearest United States Army Force Commander, at times and at
places directed by him, all equipment and supplies of whatever nature under their control.
5. We hereby direct the commanders of all Japanese forces in the Philippine Islands at once to
liberate all Allied prisoners of war and civilian internees under their control, and to provide for
their protection, care, maintenance and immediate transportation to places as directed by the
nearest United States Army Force Commander.
6. We hereby undertake to transmit the directives given in Paragraphs 1 through 5, above, to all
Japanese forces in the Philippine Islands immediately by all means within our power, and further
to furnish to the Commanding General, United States Army Forces, Western Pacific, all
necessary Japanese emissaries fully empowered to bring about the surrender of Japanese forces
in the Philippine Islands with whom we are not in contact.
317
7. We hereby undertake to furnish immediately to the Commanding General, United States Army
Forces, Western Pacific, a statement of the designation, numbers, locations, and commanders of
all Japanese armed forces, ground, sea, or air, in the Philippine Islands.
8. We hereby undertake faithfully to obey all further proclamation, orders and directives deemed
by the Commanding General, United States Armed Forces, Western Pacific, to be proper to
effectuate this surrender.
Signed at Camp John Hay, Baguio, Mountain Province, Luzon, Philippine Islands, at 1210 hours
3 September 1945:
TOMOYUKI YAMASHITA,
General, Imperial Japanese
Army Highest Commander,
Imperial Japanese Army in the Philippines.
DENHICI OKOCHI,
Vice Admiral, Imperial Japanese
Navy, Highest Commander,
Imperial Japanese Navy in the Philippines.
By command and in behalf
of the Japanese Imperial
General Headquarters
318
Accepted at Camp John Hay, Baguio, Mountain Province Luzon
Philippine Islands, at 1210 hours 3 September 1945:
For the Commander-in-Chief, United States Army Forces, Pacific:
EDMOND H. LEAVY,
Major General, USA
Deputy Commander, United States Army Forces,
Western Pacific.
