81
TOPIC 4: 1896 Philippine Revolution
List of Reading Materials:
• Acta de la Proclamación
• Artemio Ricarte’s Declaration
• Bonifacio’s Letter to Nakpil
• Bonifacio’s Letter to Jacinto
• Decalogue of the Katipunan
• Decree Establishing the Revolutionary Katipunan
• Kartilya ng Katipunan
• Pag-ibig sa Tinubuang Lupa
• “Ang Dapat Mabatid”
• Gregoria de Jesus
82
Introduction for the 1896 Philippine Revolution
As the Philippines enter the last decade of the 19th century, the tension between the Filipinos and
the Spaniards that have been long ignored is slowly taking hold of public consciousness. This
was largely in part because of the efforts of Filipino propagandists in Europe. However, while the
Propaganda Movement slowly loses momentum with its failure to produce tangible reforms in
the colony there was a growing number of the Filipinos who were drawn towards the idea of
independence. On the day of Jose Rizal’s exile to Dapitan on July 7, 1892, a revolutionary
organization was formally established – the Kataastaasan Kagalanggalangang Katipunan ng mga
Anak ng Bayan. And in 1896, the Katipunan, under the guidance of Andres Bonifacio,
spearheaded the revolution against Spain with the goal of gaining independence.
The selected documents trace the history of the 1896 Philippine Revolution from the
establishment of the Katipunan up to the creation of a revolutionary government under Emilio
Aguinaldo in June 1898. Most of the materials account for the crucial parts of the Revolution by
exploring the official documents of the Katipunan, the personal correspondences of Andres
Bonifacio, and the autobiography of Gregoria de Jesus. It also includes the Acta de la
Proclamación de Independencia del Pueblo Filipino and the Decree of June 23, 1898 which both
reflects the continuing struggle for independence and recognition by the Filipino revolutionists.
83
“Acta de la Proclamación de Independencia del Pueblo Filipino” (Declaration of Philippine
Independence) written by Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista
Source: Gregorio F. Zaide, ed., Documentary Sources of Philippine History, vol. 9 (Metro
Manila: National Bookstore, Inc., 1990), pp. 235-241.
Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista, born in Biñan, Laguna in 1830, was a lawyer and an adviser to
General Emilio Aguinaldo. He accomplished his basic education in Laguna before transferring to
Manila in order to study law at the University of Santo Tomas. According to the National
Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP), Bautista was a distant relative of Dr. Jose
Rizal who often called him “Tio Bosyong.” Before the outbreak of the 1896 Philippine
Revolution, he was a known supporter of the Propaganda Movement’s campaign for reforms.
Under the context of the war, Bautista assumed the roles of political adviser and war auditor for
Aguinaldo’s revolutionary government.
The “Acta de la Proclamación de Independencia del Pueblo Filipino” or simply the Act of the
Declaration of Philippine Independence was a document penned by Bautista in his capacity as
advisor to Aguinaldo. The independence document was read by him before a crowd who
attended the ceremony on 12 June 1898 in Kawit, Cavite. Most interestingly, it was Bautista and
not Aguinaldo who waved the Philippine flag, according to the NHCP. The document was signed
by 98 individuals including an American colonel named L.M. Johnson who served as witness to
the event. The Act of the Declaration of Philippine Independence cited in this file is an English
translation most probably provided by the historian, Gregorio F. Zaide.
In the town of Cavite Viejo, in this province of Cavite, on the twelfth day of June eighteen
hundred and ninety-eight, before me, Don Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista, Auditor of War and
Special Commissioner appointed to proclaim and solemnize this act by the Dictatorial
Government of these Philippine Islands, for the purposes and by virtue of the circular addressed
by the Eminent Dictator of the same Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy, the undersigned being
assembled, among whom figure commanders of his army and the representatives of others who
have not been able to attend and notable residents of various towns of the same, taking into
consideration that their inhabitants being already weary of bearing the ominous yoke of Spanish
domination, on account of the arbitrary arrests and harsh treatment practised by the Civil Guard
to the extent of causing death with the connivance and even with the expressed orders of their
commanders, who sometimes went to the extreme of ordering the shooting of prisoners under the
pretext that they were attempting to escape, in violation of the provisions of the Regulations of
their Corps, which abuses were unpunished on account of the unjust deportations, especially
those decreed by General Blanco, of eminent personages and of high social position, at the
84
instigation of the Archbishop and the friars interested in keeping them out of the way for their
own and avaricious purposes, deportations which were quickly brought about by a method of
precedure more execrable than that of the Inquisition and which every civilized nation rejects on
account of a decision being rendered without a hearing of the persons accused, the people
determined to start an insurrectionary movement in August, eighteen hundred and ninety-six, for
the purpose of recovering the independence and sovereignty of which Spain deprived them
through the Adelantado Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, who continuing the course followed by his
predecessor Fernando de Magallanes, who arrived upon the shores of Cebu and occupied that
Island by virtue of the treaty of friendship which he celebrated with its King Tupas, although he
was killed on the battle which took place on said shores, to which he was provoked by King
Kalipulako de Maktan, who was suspicious of his bad intention; he landed on the Island of
Bohol, entering also into the celebrated blood compact of friendship with its King Sikatuna, for
the purpose, after taking Cebu by force of arms, because the successor of Tupas did not permit
him to occupy it, of coming to Manila, the capital, as he did, likewise winning the friendship of
King Soliman and Lakandula and afterwards taking possession of it and thus the entire
Archipelago for Spain, by virtue of an order of King Philip II; that in view of these historical
data, because in international law the prescription established by the laws legalizing even the
fraudulent acquisition of the property of individuals is not recognized, there can be no doubt as
the legality of such a movement as the one that was quieted but not entirely quenched by the
pacification proposed by Pedro A. Paterno with Don Emilio Aguinaldo as President of the
Republican government established in Biak na bato, and accepted by the Governor General, Don
Fernando Primo de Rivera, under conditions which were established, some in writing and others
verbally, among them a general amnesty for all deported and sentenced; that by reason of
nonfulfillment of some of these conditions after the destruction of the Spanish squadron by the
North American force and the bombardment of Cavite, Don Emilio Aguinaldo returned to start a
new revolution, and hardly had he given the word to commence, on the thirty-first of the last
month, when several towns anticipated movement, and on the twenty-eight between Imus and
Cavite Viejo there was an engagement and captured a Spanish force one hundred and seventy
eight, commanded by a major of marine infantry. This movement spread like an electric spark
through the other towns not only in this province, but also in Bataan, Pampanga, Batangas,
Bulacan, Laguna, and Moron, some of them with seaports. So complete is the triumph of our
arms, truly marvelous and unparalleled in the history of colonial revolutions, that in the first
province there remain to be surrendered only the detachments of Naic and Indang; in the second
there are none at all, in the third, resistance by the Spanish forces is localized in the town of San
Fernando, where the greater part are concentrated, the remainder being in Macabebe, Sexmoan
and Guagua; in the fourth only in the city of Lipa; in the fifth, in the capital and Calumpit; and in
the remaining two, only in their respective capitals. The city of Manila will soon be completely
besieged by our forces, and also the posts in the provinces of Nueva Ecija, Tarlac, Pangasinan,
La Union, Zambales, and several others in the Visayan islands, where insurrection has broken
out in several of their towns, having started in some almost at the moment of completing that
pacification, and in others even before that, wherefore the independence of our territory and the
recovery of our sovereignty are assured. And summoning as a witness of the rectitude of our
intentions, the Supreme Judge of the Universe, and under the protection of the mighty and
85
humane North American Nation, we proclaim and solemnly declare, in the name and by the
authority of the inhabitants of all these Philippine Islands, that they are and have the right to be
free and independent; that they are released from all obedience to the crown of Spain; that every
political ties between the two is and must be completely severed and annulled; and that, like all
free and independent states, they have complete authority to make war, conclude peace, establish
treaties of commerce, enter into alliances, regulate commerce, and execute other acts and things
that Independent States have the right to do. Reposing firm confidence in the protection of Divine
Providence, we mutually pledge for the support of this declaration, our lives, our fortunes and
our most sacred possession, which is our honor. We acknowledge, approve and confirm, together
with the orders that have been issued therefrom, the Dictatorship established by Don Emilio
Aguinaldo, whom we honor as the Supreme Chief of this nation, which this day commences to
have a life of its own, in the belief that he is the instrument selected by God, in spite of his humble
origin, to effect the redemption of this unfortunate people, as foretold by Doctor Jose Rizal in the
magnificent verses which he composed when he was preparing to be shot, liberating them from
the yoke of Spanish domination in punishment of the impunity with which their Government
allowed to the commission of abuses by its subordinates; and for the unjust executions of said
Rizal and others who were sacrificed to please the greedy body of friars in their insatiable desire
to seek revenge upon and exterminate all those who are opposed to their Machiavellian purposes,
which tramples upon the penal code prescribed for these islands; and for the sake of those
persons who, though merely suspected, were convicted by the commanders of detachments at the
instigation of the friars without form or semblances of a trial and without the spiritual
consolation afforded by our sacred religion; and likewise for the execution for the same motives
of the eminent native Filipino priests Doctor Jose Burgos, Mariano Gomez, and Jacinto Zamora,
whose innocent blood was shed through the intrigues of those so-called religious orders which
pretended that a military insurrection had broken out on the night of January 21st, 1872, in the
Fort of San Felipe in the town of Cavite, accusing said martyrs of starting it, so as to prevent the
execution of the decree-sentence issued by the Council of State in the appeal in administrative
litigation interposed by the Secular Clergy against the Royal Orders wherein it was directed that
the parishes under them in the jurisdiction of this Archbishopric should be turned over to the
Recoletos in exchange for those controlled by the Recoletos in Mindanao, which were transferred
by the Jesuits. These revoked completely, and the return of those parishes was ordered. The
papers were filed in the Colonial Department, to which they were sent some the last months of the
preceding year, for the preparation of the respective Royal Provision. That was what caused the
tree of Liberty to bud in this land of ours, the iniquitous measures employed to suppress it only
causing it to grow more and more, until, the last drop having been drained from the cup of our
afflictions, the former insurrection broke out at Caloocan, extended to Santa Mesa, and
continued its course to the adjoining places in this province, where the unequalled heroism of its
inhabitants met with failure in the battles with General Blanco, and continued to struggle against
the great hosts of General Polavieja for the period of three months, without any of the war
material that we now possess, but commencing with arms peculiar to the country, such as the
bolo, sharpened bamboo, and arrow. Moreover, we confer upon our renowned Dictator, Don
Emilio Aguinaldo, all the powers necessary for the due administration of his Government,
including the prerogatives of pardon and amnesty. And finally,
86
it was unanimously resolved that this Nation, independent from this day, must use the same flag
used heretofore, whose design and colors are described in the accompanying drawing, with
design representing in natural colors the three arms referred to. The white triangle represents the
distinctive emblem of the famous Katipunan Society, which by means of its compact of blood
urged on the masses of the people to insurrection; the three stars represent the principal Islands
of this Archipelago, Luzon, Mindanao, and Panay, in which this insurrectionary movement broke
out; the sun represents the gigantic strides that have been made by the sons of this land on the
road of progress and civilization, its eight rays symbolizing the eight provinces of Manila, Cavite,
Bulacan, Pampanga, Nueva Ecija, Bataan, Laguna and Batangas, which were declared in a state
of war almost as soon as the first insurrectionary movement was initiated; and the colors blue,
red and white commemorate those of the flag of the United States of North America, in
manifestation of our profound gratitude towards that Great Nation for the disinterested
protection she is extending to us and will continue to extend to us. And grasping said flag, I
displayed it to the assemblage, and all swore solemnly to recognize it and defend it to the last
drop of our blood. In witness whereof, I commit the proceedings in writing in this act, which is
signed with me by all those concurring in this act, as well as by the only foreigner a North
American subject, Mr. L.M. Johnson, Colonel of Artillery, who attended the meeting, to all of
which I certify.
(Signed) AMBROSIO RIANZARES BAUTISTA
87
The declaration of Artemio Ricarte (dated 24 March 1897) concerning the Tejeros
Convention
Source: Jim Richardson, The Light of Liberty: Documents and Studies on the Katipunan,
1892-1897 (Quezon City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 2013), pp. 342-346.
Artemio Ricarte, known by his nom de guerre “Vibora,” was one of the high-ranking generals of
the Katipunan during the course of the 1896 Philippine Revolution. Ricarte was born in Batac,
Ilocos Norte in 1866 where he began his formal schooling. Eventually, he transferred to Manila
for his tertiary education at Collegio de San Juan de Letran. Before the outbreak of the
revolution, he was initiated into the secret society and eventually rose through the ranks as
treasurer for Balangay ng mga Anak Bayan Mapagtiis (a Katipunan chapter in San Francisco de
Malabon, Cavite where he settled). When the revolution commenced, Ricarte became a
commander in one of the earliest military encounters against the Spanish forces in Cavite – the
Battle of San Francisco de Malabon. During the Tejeros Convention on 22 March 1897, he was
elected by his peers as the Captain-General of the revolutionary government.
The declaration of Ricarte is an important document that provides a glimpse into the politics of
the revolution as evidenced in the events of the Tejeros Convention. Here, Ricarte writes his
reluctance to participate in an oath-taking ceremony at Tanza the day after the controversial
convention. He thinks that he was obligated to attend the ceremony due to the presence of high
ranking Magdiwang officials from various towns in Cavite. In The Revolt of the Masses: The
Story of Bonifacio and the Katipunan (1956), Teodoro A. Agoncillo (pp. 221-222) cites Ricarte’s
revealing views about the drama in Tejeros: “This premature oath-taking will cause serious
trouble and misunderstanding among the revolutionists, for I myself witnessed all that transpired
in Tejeros.” The declaration of Ricarte in this file has an English translation provided the
historian, Jim Richardson.
Ako si Artemio Ricarte “Vibora” may katampatang taong, taga bayan ng Batak, lalauigan ng
Hukuman ng Ilocos Norte, kapatid sa K.K.K. ng mga A.N.B., at tumatahan dito sa Mapagtiis o
Malabon sakop ng S.B. Magdiuang o Noveleta, ay nagsasaysay ng boong katotohanan at
hanggang sa labi ng hukay ay aking haharapan.
Na sa oras na ikaanim ng hapon kahapon alinsunod sa isang liham sarinlan na kalakip nito, ay
sumapit ako sa Convento ng bayan ng Tanza o Panguagui, at nadatnan ko ang Kgg. na Dakilang
G. Emiliano Riego de Dios, Ministro de Fomento, at Kgg. na Dakilang G. Mariano Trias,
Ministro de Gracia y Justicia ng S.B. Magdiuang, pati G. Santiago Rillo, Vicente Riego de Dios,
88
at iba’t iba pang Guinoo sa bayan bayang nasasakupan nitong nasabing S.B.; at gayon din na
nadatnan ko ang ilang Matataas na G. Pinuno sa S.B. Magdalo, at sa pagdating ko, ay
namasdang kong nakahanda ang isang Crucifijo sa guitna ng Antesala ng nasabing Convento; at
ang mga G. Pinunong nabangguit na, ay kapagkaraka’y nagsabi ng kadahilanan ng pagkahiling
nila na ako’y humarap doon, at ualang ibang dahil, kundi ang pagtanggap sa pamamagitan ng
isang panunumpa sa harapan ng Crucifijo at sa masid ng kalahatan o ilang bayan, ng
katungkulang pagka Pangulong Digma ng Katagalugan, ayon sa kinalabasan ng pagkapulong
ng arao na ika 22 nitong lumalakad na buan; sa bagay na ito, ay ipinakita ko muli sa kalahatang
naroroon, ang malaking kaayaoan kong tumanggap ng naturang katungkulan sa mga
kadahilanang sumusunod:
Una- Aking pinasasalamatan ang paglabas ko sa paghalal na ito, na maging Pangulong Hukbo
ng buong Katagalugan; datapua kinikilala kong may karumihan o kalabuan ang pagkaparaan
ng pagkahalal sa akin; sapagkat napaguari ko na hindi nasunod ang tunay na kalooban ng mga
taong bayan at;
Ikalaua – Iginagalang ko ang naturang katungkulan, at natatalastas ko ang kaniyang kalakhan
at kapangyarihan; at gayon din na natatakot ako ang buong aking nakakayanan sa lahat ng
bagay, na lubhang kulang na kulang at maliit na maliit sa dahilang ito, natalos at napagkilala ko
ang di ko karapatan; sa lahat ng ito, at hindi maaamin ng konsiyensiya ko ang pagtanggap ng
nasabing katungkulan: Gayon ang unang isinagot ko sa mga G. at mga taong bayang naroroon
na sari saring pinagbuhatan, na aking nakaharap sa Convento at nagpatalastas sa akin ng
pagsumpa sa pagtanggap sa gabing yaon ng nasabing katungkulan.
Ako’y nagsabi rin na kung sa gabing ito’y maghahandog ng panunumpa sa pagtanggap na
nasabi ng katungkulan, ay hindi ako makakaayon, dahil
Una -- Sa uala sa Kapulungan ang mga karamihang pinunong humarap sa paghahalal, lalung
lalo na ang President ng pagkapulong sa nasabing oras na ika 22 nitong lumalakad na buan;
Ikalaua -- Sa pagkatanto ko na kung ito’y gagauin, siya ang pagmumulan ng malaking
kaguluhan at hindi ipagkakaisa ng mga bayan bayan, anupa’t ipinahalata ko sa kalahatan ang
totoong hindi pag ayon, hanggang sa ako’y humingi sa kaginoohan at sa taong bayan, ng
dalauang bagay:
Patayin ako sa oras ng gabing yaon, sa kadahilanang nasasabi sa itaas na ito o bigyan ako ng
tatlong oras na pahintulot o isang oras kaya at ng mapag isip ko ang mga bagay bagay na
nararapat sa pagtanggap ng nasabing katungkulan; itong ikalauang bagay na hiniling ko, ay
89
ginagaua kong paraan lamang, upang makaalis ako sa Kapulungang yaon. Ang lahat na aking
hiniling, ay ualang nangyari, sapagka’t ualang umayon ni kahit isa man lamang; sa madaling
salita, sa himok at pag amu amo’y kalahatan sa pamamagitan ng Kgg. na Dakilang G. Emilio
Aguinaldo, Pangulong Digma ng S.B. Magdalo, na sa oras ng ikaualo ng gabi, ay naghandog ng
panunumpa, ang Kgg. na Dakilang G. Mariano Trias, Ministro de Gracia y Justicia ng S.B.
Magdiuang bagaman, aking mauulit, na hindi maaamin ng aking kalooban, sa oras na ikaisa ng
hatinggabing yaon, ay naghandog din ako ng panunumpa ng pagtanggap ng katungkulang pagka
Pangulong Hukbo ng buong Katagalugan.
Ito ang buong katotohanan na kailanma’y hindi ko matatalikdan kaya’t sa arao na ito ika 24 ng
buan ng Marzo ng taong isang libo, ualong daan, siam na put pito, ay linagdaan ko ng tunay
kong pangalan, apellido at pamagat na tinataglay.
G. Artemio Ricarte
Vibora
[ENGLISH TRANSLATION]
I, Artemio Ricarte “Vibora”, of legal age, of the town of Batak in the provincial jurisdiction of
Ilocos Norte, a brother of the K.K.K. ng mga A.N.B. and residing here at Mapagtiis or Malabon,
under the jurisdiction of the S.B. Magdiwang or Noveleta, declare the following to be the whole
truth that I shall maintain to the grave.
That at six o’clock yesterday afternoon, in conformity with the attached letter [see below], I went
to the convento of the town of Tanza or Panguagui and there I found the Honorable Don
Emiliano Riego de Dios, Minister of Development, and the Honorable Don Mariano Trias,
Minister of Grace and Justice of the S.B. Magdiwang, together with Srs. Santiago Rillo, Vicente
Riego de Dios, and other gentlemen from the towns under the jurisdiction of the said S.B., and
likewise I found various high chiefs of S.B. Magdalo. Upon my arrival I noticed that a crucifix
had been prepared in the center of the hall of the said convento; and the aforementioned chiefs
thereupon informed me of the reason why they had requested my presence there, which was none
other than that I should take an oath of office, before the crucifix and watched by people from all
or some of the towns, as President of War of Katagalugan, in conformity with the outcome of the
convention held on the 22nd of the current month. In this regard I again stated to all those
present there my great reluctance to accept said office for the following reasons:-
90
First - That I appreciated having been elected President of War of all Katagalugan in this
election, but that I recognized there had been dirty or shady practices in the manner of my
election, because I understood that it had not been in conformity with the true will of the people.
Second - That I respected the said office and realized its importance and authority; and that I
was fearful in all respects about my abilities. I considered myself very deficient and inadequate,
and recognized that I did not have the necessary competence, and that on account of all this I
could not in good conscience accept the said office. This was my first reply to the gentlemen and
other people present there, from various places, whom I met at the convento, and who advised
me that I must take the oath of office that very night.
I also stated that if the oath of said office was to be administered that very same night I could not
agree, because:
First - The majority of the chiefs present at the election, and especially the President of the
convention held at the said time, the 22nd of the present month, were absent from the Assembly.
Second - I knew that if this was done, it would cause much disturbance and discord in the towns;
in short, I gave them all to understand that I strongly disagreed, to the extent that I requested of
the gentlemen and the townspeople two things:
That they kill me that same night, for the reasons above cited, or that they give me three hours,
or at least one hour, to think over what I must necessarily do in order to accept said office; this
second request was but a mere pretext, in order to enable me to absent myself from that
Assembly. I obtained nothing of what I requested, because not even one of them gave me his
assent. To be brief, at the request and supplication of all, His Excellency Don Emilio Aguinaldo,
President of War of S.B. Magdalo, took the oath at about eight o’clock in the evening, together
with His Excellency Mariano Trias, Minister of Grace and Justice of S.B. Magdiwang, and
though, I again repeat, I could not in good conscience accept it, I also took the oath as President
of War of all Katagalugan, at about one o’clock that night.
This is the whole truth which I shall never be able to retract, hence, on this day the 24th of the
month of March, of the year one thousand, eight hundred and ninety-seven, I sign my real name,
surname and the alias I bear.
Don Artemio Ricarte
Vibora
91
“Andres Bonifacio’s Letter to Julio Nakpil, February 13, 1897”
Source: Richardson, Jim. “Andres Bonifacio, Letter to Julio Nakpil, February 13, 1897.” Last
modified 2018. http://www.kasaysayan-kkk.info/cavite-politics-in-a-time-of-revolution/andres
bonifacio-letter-to-julio-nakpil-february-13-1897
Bonifacio’s letter to Julio Nakpil provides a glimpse to the internal affairs of the
Katipunan. Two interesting matter arose from the document. The first one is one the subject of an
imprisoned Augustinian friar by the name of Antonio Piernavieja who was being held captive.
And the second subject is on the copy of the “Himno Nacional” which Nakpil sent to Bonifacio.
The matter regarding Piernavieja, details how he was being treated in Bonifacio’s camp.
Richardson noted that there seems to be an ongoing negotiation for Piernavieja’s released should
a reasonable sum be paid. Regarding the matter of the “Himno Nacional,” Richardson noted that
Nakpil composed this upon the request of Bonifacio when they were still encamped in Balara in
the late months of 1896.
Andres Bonifacio’s Letter to Julio Nakpil, February 13, 1897
[Tagalog text]
Sa Kap... na M. Julio Nakpil Guiliw, Pangulo ng M. na Sangunian sa bayan ng Pasig.
Guiliw kong kapatid: tinangap ko po rito ang iniyong kalatas gawa ng ika 30 ng Enerong
nagdaan, at sa pagkatanto ng doo’y iniyong saad, ay ang tugon ko’y ang sumusunod.
Ako po ay tumangap ng sulat niniyo na dalawang veces na at aking sinagot naman, nguni’t ang
di malaman ay kun tinangap niniyo, baga man aquing ipinaaalaala na ang sagot ng huli ay
saloob na ng buang ito.
Kalakip ng kalatas niniyo na sinasagot ko, na dumating sa akin ng ika [blank] ng lumalakad, ay
tinangap ko ang Himno Nacional at susundin ang tanging hiling sainiyo ukol dito.
Ang Fraileng si Antonio Piernavieja ay mabute at kalakip na ipinadadala ko sa iniyo upang
gawin ang nararapat, ang sulat ng nasabing Fraile sa kaniyang anak na ibinabalita ang
kaniyang kalagayan at tuloy sinasabi na siya ang may nasa na maabuloy sa atin. Ayon dito sa
abuloy na ito at sa sabi niniyo na ang anak na iyan ay ayos sa atin at makaabuloy ng halagang
$1000; sa akala ko ay makahihingi tayo ng $5000 – limang libong piso, sapagka sa balita ko ay
92
may kualtang marame na hindi niya lubos ipagdadamdam ang halagang ito; kaya ka yo ang
bahalang tumapon. Masasahe niniyo tuloy sa anak niya ang kaniyang amo ay hindi mapapatay
na at dili naman pahihirapan, sapagka ipinagutos ko na taga ingat ng bilanguan na huag na
siyang papagtrabahuhin.
Ako ay lubos nagagalak sa balita inyo tungkol sa kay Grl. Francisco de los Santos, at kun kayo
ay susulat sa kaniya ay masabi niniyo ang aking sa kaniya ay pagpupuri.
Mangyare po lamang na kun ano man ang mangyare sa sulat ni Piernavieja sa kanyang anak, ay
malaman ko agad.
Ako po at ilang mga taga rian ay may panukala na humagay sa bayang Bakood at ng malapit
dian sa atin at ang isapa ay ng doon magawa ang mga paggagayak ng mga kakailanganin sa
paguwi namin dian na ito ay di malalaon, sapagka talastas ko na malaking lubha ang kailangan
na tayo ay magkapipisan dian.
Ingatan kayong lahat dian ng Maykapal; at tangapin ang yakap na ipinahahatid
namin. Malabon, ika 13 ng Febrero ng 1897.
Ang K. Pangulo
And.: Bonifacio
Maypagasa
[English translation]
To Brother Mr Julio Nakpil, Guiliw, President of the High Council in the town of Pasig.
My brother Guiliw: I have received here your letter written on 30th January last, and, having
understood what you say in it, my reply is as follows.
I received your [earlier?] letter twice already, and have also replied, but what I don’t know is
whether you received it, although I have reminded you to reply to it within the present month.
93
Together with your letter to which I am now replying, which reached me on the [blank] of the
present month, I received the National Hymn and I will comply with the special request that has
been made to you in this regard.
The friar Antonio Piernavieja is well, and together with this I am sending you, so that you can do
what is necessary, the letter of the said friar to his son giving news of his current situation and
going on to say that he has the desire to give us a contribution. In relation to this donation, and
to what you said about the son settling with us to contribute the amount of $1,000: in my opinion
we could ask for $5,000 – five thousand pesos, because my information is that they have lots of
money and this amount would not totally overwhelm them; so it is up to you to agree. Then you
can go ahead and tell the son that his father will not be killed, nor even suffer hardship, because
I have instructed the guards of the prison that he should not be made to work.
I am overjoyed by your news about Grl. Francisco de los Santos, and if you are going to write to
him could you tell him that I applaud him.
Whatever happens in relation to the letter of Piernavieja to his son, please can I know as soon as
possible.
Myself and some people from there have a plan to position ourselves in the town of Bakood so
that we are nearer to there, and one other thing is that it will not take long there for the
necessary preparations to be made for our return home, because I appreciate very gravely the
need for us to group together there.
May the Creator take care of you all there; and accept the embrace that we
send. Malabon, February 13, 1897
The Supreme President
And.: Bonifacio
Maypagasa
