319
TOPIC 9: Post-War Philippines
List of Reading Materials:
1. Sergio Osmena’s SONA
2. Republic Act No. 1400
3. Carlos P. Garcia’s SONA
4. Magsaysay’s Rizal Day Speech
5. Magsaysay’s Inaugural Address
6. RP-US Military Agreement
7. Quirino’s Inauguration
8. Recto’s Economic Nationalism
9. Romulo’s Letter of Resignation
10. Macapagal’s Address on Agrarian Land Reform Code
320
Introduction to the Post-War Philippines, 1945-1965
The following section of historical sources includes documents and speeches from the
term of presidents of the Philippines as well as noted statesmen under the postwar Philippines.
Coming from the devastation of the Second World War in 1945, this period starts with the
rehabilitation of the country alongside its independence of the Philippines from United States as
a sovereign nation-state in 1946. The period which starts from year 1945 to 1964 with the
presidencies of Sergio Osmena, Manuel Roxas, Elpidio Quirino, Ramon Magsaysay, Carlos
Garcia, and Diosdado Macapagal. This period in Philippine history can be characterized with the
issues that pressed on with the nation-state as it was rebuilding itself from the economic impact
of the war, the political turmoil that occurred internally with the insurgencies, and the changing
alignments within the diplomatic arena in time of the Cold War.
This section includes presidential inaugural addresses, the state of the nation addresses, and
other landmark speeches that defined the presidencies of Osmena, Roxas, Quirino, Magsaysay,
Garcia, and Macapagal. These selections offer the range of issues that can characterize the issues
that were relevant during the period which include postwar rehabilitation, defense against
insurgencies, diplomatic alignment with the United States and other countries, agrarian land
reform, economic and cultural nationalism among others. Aside from these documents,
documents from prominent nationalist statesmen such as Claro Recto and Carlos Romulo are
included to show perspectives prevailing within the same issues that beset the nation-state. In
reading these documents, it can provide an understanding of the continuities and changes that
occurred during this time when the nation-state was rebuilding itself alongside its own nation
building as an independent sovereign state.
321
Sergio Osmeña, State of the Nation Address, June 9, 1945
Popularly known as the "Grand Old Man of Cebu," Sergio Osmeña (September 9, 1878 -
October 19, 1961) served as the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines succeeding
Manuel L. Quezon after the latter's death in 1944. Osmeña returned to the Philippines with
General Douglas MacArthur and his soldiers on October 20, 1944. He then headed the
Commonwealth government that was re-established temporarily in Tacloban, Leyte on October
23, 1944.
In the wake of the Japanese defeat, Osmeña reorganized the government in response to
the needs of the country. On March 7, 1945, he signed an Executive Order which provided the
restoration of the executive departments before the war. On June 9, Osmeña called a
speASSOCIATE sion of Congress where he delivered his first and only State of the Nation
Address at the provisional quarters in an old school building at Lepanto Street in Manila.
Osmeña delivered a comprehensive report on the work done by the Commonwealth government
for three years in Washington, DC. He also described the social conditions in the Philippines
during the war and acknowledged the valuable help provided by the Filipino guerrillas to the
American forces in the liberation of the Philippines.
Excerpt:
Message
of
His Excellency Sergio Osmeña
President of the Philippines
To the Congress
On the State of the Nation
[Delivered on June 9, 1945]
GENTLEMEN OF THE CONGRESS:
Today, a moment of great historic significance, the voice of our people, muted throughout the
long dreary night of enemy enslavement, is to be heard again in the halls of this Congress,
through their duly elected representatives.
It has been a long lapse of time since that day in November, 1941, when you were elected, to this
day when you gather in your first session. We can hardly recognize our country after the
cataclysm that has engulfed it. The war has left its livid scars everywhere—on our buildings as
322
well as on men’s souls. Probably nothing can more starkly summarize our present plight than the
fact that the Executive and Legislative branches of our Government have to meet today in a
borrowed house because our Legislative Building is a heap of rubble and ashes, mute witness to
the savage desperation of the beaten enemy.
The tragedy that has afflicted our nation has lacerated our hearts. We all miss today many dear
and familiar faces that are no more. But perhaps no sorrow has touched us more deeply than the
passing of our beloved leader, Manuel L. Quezon. I know, however, that you feel as I do that his
immortal spirit abides with us in this hour of trial and crisis, encouraging us to proceed with the
arduous tasks that lie ahead. This great man, who dedicated his entire life to his country, died as
he would have wanted to die—in line of duty. Soon his mortal remains, kept at the Arlington
National Cemetery at Virginia, will be brought back to the Philippines, and we shall all have the
opportunity of rendering him our last homage of admiration and affection. We shall erect him a
monument so that we and our generations yet unborn may keep his memory enshrined in our
hearts.
The Philippines is the one territory under the American flag which has suffered the most at the
invader’s hands. Not only are its war casualties the highest in proportion to population, not only
have its cities and towns been destroyed and looted, its countrysides and farms laid waste, and its
whole economic structure ruined, but its people have undergone more physical pain and mental
anguish than in any other part of the United States. As early as December 8, 1941, a few hours
after her felon attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan sent bombers and task forces to the Philippines.
Unavoidably turned into a battlefield, our country suffered heavily in men and property,
especially in Bataan, where the Filipino-American Army battled the Japanese forces for four long
months.
Then followed a period of enemy occupation, cruel and humiliating. No sooner had the fighting
in Bataan ended than the enemy began the systematic looting of our country. There was no limit
to what he could requisition with his worthless money. Even our barest necessities were
commandeered. And when we tried to stand by our rights, force, ruthless force, immediately
intervened. With or without cause, people by the scores were arrested and sent to prison and
concentration camps—some to be tortured, others to be executed. As time went on, we became
more impoverished, while the enemy became still more cruel and arrogant. After undergoing
three years of enemy domination, no people was a more pitiful sight than the Filipinos—lean,
ragged and famished.
I wish to stress the fact that the extreme suffering of the Filipinos and the widespread destruction
wrought on our country has been due, in a large measure, to their unwavering loyalty to the
United States. No people, I believe, has given so much proof of fidelity to the cause of the
mother country as the Filipinos.
323
... Unwilling to bow to the enemy, the Filipino people valiantly took up the struggle with all the
strength they could muster. Patriotic groups soon sprang up throughout the length and breadth of
the Archipelago. At first eluding the enemy, the guerrillas took to the mountains, but with the
active support of the civilian population they quickly grew in number and strength to become a
virtual challenge to the enemy. The story of the guerrilleros and of the civilian patriots who
helped them, is an epic of heroism, loyalty and sacrifice. As far as possible they should be given
recognition. Recognized guerrilla units have already been incorporated into the Philippine Army.
As stated in Leyte, in praising the guerrillas we should not be forgetful of the loyal civilians who
were left behind and, at the risk of their lives, supported the resistance movement. Included
among these civilians were those who, at the beginning of the war, were civil service employees
or holders of subordinate positions in the government, and who remained at their posts to protect
the people and extend to them all possible aid and comfort. They should, as a general principle,
be recalled as soon as their services should be needed; only for strong reasons should they be
deprived of their privilege to serve. This policy applies as well to elected provincial and
municipal officials who were chosen in the election of 1940, thus giving due consideration to the
will of the people as expressed at the polls.
... But the tasks of peace are at times more exacting than those of war. We are administering the
affairs of eighteen million people just delivered from three long years of enslavement. To them
we owe justice, order and the means to live in contentment and happiness. I am aware that our
means at the moment are inadequate. We are not able to provide our people with as much as they
deserve. But we shall not falter in the line of duty.
Let us get together in one mighty effort. Let us set aside selfish considerations and forget petty
differences. Only in unity can there be strength. To the experienced, I turn for advice. From the
youth of the land, I ask for its enthusiasm and energies. My faith in our people is unbounded.
Over the ruins of our cities and barrios we shall build anew. In this most crucial hour of our
history, I look forward to our destiny unafraid, confident that, God willing, ours will be a happy,
progressive and prosperous land.
In closing, permit me to congratulate you most heartily for being the first elective Congress to
meet in a country liberated from the enemy, although the Philippines is among the last to be free
from enemy occupation and control.
I wish you all success in discharging the tremendous responsibility that is yours during the
present emergency.
324
Republic Act No. 1400
Land Reform Act of 1955
An Act Defining a Land Tenure Policy, Providing for an Instrumentality to Carry out the Policy,
and appropriating for its implementation.
Ramon Magsaysay, the third President of the Third Republic announced during his first
State of the Nation Address that agriculture would be a priority of his administration. He aimed
for farmers' education particularly in modern agricultural methods and called for the
improvement of irrigation systems to improve farm production. Known as the "People's
President" and the "Champion of Philippine Agriculture," Magsaysay implemented programs and
policies to improve agriculture and empower rural communities which are important to national
recovery.
One of the enacted laws about land reform during the Magsaysay administration was the
Republic Act No. 1400 also known as the Land Reform Act of 1955. This created the Land
Tenure Administration (LTA) which has the the following functions: (1) make studies on the land
tenure problems throughout the Philippines and prepare over-all long range plans to solve
problems; (2) initiate immediate investigation in areas reporting land tenure difficulties and
recommend appropriate action and; (3) prepare a plan for the systematic opening of virgin lands
of the public domain for distribution to tenants.
Excerpt:
SECTION 1. Short title.—This Act shall be known as the “Land Reform Act of 1955.” SEC. 2.
Declaration of policy.—It is the declared policy of the State to create and maintain an agrarian
system which is peaceful, prosperous and stable, and to this end the Government shall establish
and distribute as many family-size farms to as many landless citizens as possible through the
opening up of public agricultural lands and the division and distribution of private agricultural
lands where agrarian conflicts exist, either by private arrangement with the owners or through
expropriation proceedings.
SEC 3. Creation and composition.—For the purpose of carrying out the policy enunciated in this
Act, there is hereby created a Land Tenure Administration, hereinafter called the Administration,
which shall be directly under the control and supervision of and responsible to the President of
the Philippines. The Administration shall consist of a Chairman and two members who shall be
appointed by the President with the consent of the Commission on Appointments and shall hold
office for a period of five years. They may be removed for cause or for incapacity to discharge
the duties of their office.
325
SEC. 4. Qualifications and compensation of members.—No person shall be appointed Chairman
or member of the Administration unless he is natural born citizen of the Philippines, at least
thirty-five years of age, and not related by affinity or consanguinity within the fourth civil degree
to any landowner who may be affected by this Act.
The Chairman shall receive an annual compensation of fifteen thousand pesos and the members
shall each receive an annual compensation of twelve thousand pesos.
SEC. 5. Functions.—It shall be the responsibility of the Administration to: (1) Make studies on
the land tenure problems throughout the Philippines, prepare over-all long range plans to solve
such problems, and keep the President and the Congress of the Philippines full informed of the
progress of the land tenure reform program;
(2) Initiate immediate investigation in areas reporting land tenure difficulties and recommend
appropriate action without delay;
(3) Inform the President and the Congress of the Philippines of any deficiency of the other
departments or agencies of the Government in the implementation of legislation bearing on or
affecting the land tenure reform;
(4) Prepare a plan for the systematic opening of virgin lands of the public domain for distribution
to tenants, preference to be given to those tenants who are ejected by virtue of mechanization and
to other landless citizens; and
(5) To implement and carry out the expropriation and the resale or lease of urban lands already
authorized by existing laws.
NEGOTIATED PURCHASE OF PRIVATE AGRICULTURAL LANDS
SEC. 11. Lands subject to purchase.—The Administration, acting for and on behalf of the
Government, may negotiate to purchase any privately owned agricultural land when the majority
of the tenants therein petition for such purchase.
SEC. 12. Action on the petition.—Upon receipt of the petition, the Administration shall; (1)
Within thirty days, determine on the basis of the information contained in the petition, the
suitability of the land for purchase, notify the petitioners and the landowner accordingly, and fix
the date for preliminary negotiations;
(2) Within sixty days from the preliminary negotiation, conduct investigations and technical
surveys to determine title to the land and its real value, taking into account (a) the prevailing
prices of similar lands in the immediate area, (b) the soil conditions topography and climate
hazards, (c) actual production, (d) accessibility, and (e) improvements; and
(3) Fix, within ninety days from the preliminary negotiation, the date for final negotiation. SEC.
13. Deposit by tenants.—Before fixing the date for final negotiation under section twelve,
paragraph (3), and in the interest of public welfare, the Administration shall require the tenants to
form a cooperative to be affiliated with a government financing cooperative agency. Such
cooperative agency shall deposit with the Administration an amount not exceeding twenty five
per centum of the annual gross produce of the principal crop or crops of such land on the basis of
the average of harvest of the three years immediately preceding the year the petition was filed.
This deposit shall be credited to the selling price to the tenants in accordance with the individual
contribution of each said deposit.
SEC. 14. Payment.—In negotiating for the purchase of agricultural land, the Administration shall
offer to pay the purchase price wholly in land certificates or partly in legal tender and partly in
326
land certificates: Provided, That the amount to be paid in legal tender shall in no case exceed
fifty per centum of the purchase price: Provided, further, That the landowner, if he desires and
the Administration so agrees, may be paid, by way of barter or exchange, with such residential,
commercial or industrial land owned by the Government as may be agreed upon by the parties.
SEC. 15. Outstanding debts of tenants.—In cases where the landowner is willing to accept
payment wholly in land certificates, the Administration is authorized to include in the price to be
paid the landowner all the outstanding debts, evidenced in writing, of the tenants to said
landowner, the Administration to be thereafter reimbursed in accordance with such rules and
regulations as it may promulgate: Provided, That the resulting increase in price by virtue of such
inclusion will not be more than ten per centum of the total cost of the land agreed upon in the
negotiated sale.
Approved, September 9, 1955.
327
Carlos P. Garcia, Third State of the Nation Address, January 25, 1960
Carlos P. Garcia (November 4, 1896 - June 14, 1971) assumed Presidency after the sudden death
of Ramon Magsaysay in 1957 and was elected for a full four-year term on the same year. Before
becoming the President of the country, Garcia was concurrently the Vice President and the
Secretary of Foreign Affairs from 1953-1957. He was the Representative of the Third District of
Bohol (1925-1931) and was a Senator under the Roxas and Quirino administration.
Garcia's Presidency is known through its Filipino First Policy as a response to America's
economic dominance in the Philippines during the postwar period. This policy aimed to assert
Filipino role in the country's economy by prioritizing Filipino-owned businesses and patronizing
Filipino-made products.
In this message of President Garcia on the State of the Nation in 1960, he explained the
significance of the Filipino First Policy "to regain economic independence" which will lead to
the country's economic progress. Garcia instituted the policy with the National Economic
Council issuing Resolution No. 204 on August 21, 1958. Aside from economic nationalism,
Garcia also mentioned other important focus of his administration which include: rural
development; development of new foreign markets; education and science; National Defense;
Public works; and health.
Excerpt:
Message
of
His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia
President of the Philippines
To the Congress
On the State of the Nation
[Delivered on January 25, 1960]
Mr. Senate President, Mr. Speaker, Members of Congress:
In the light of what has been accomplished since I last had the honor to address you, it is with an
uplifted spirit that today I call for further determined and courageous action toward the great
national goals.
328
During the year 1959 we touched a few peaks in progress’ highway. We piled up bigger surpluses
in. rice and corn, thus firming up our success in the campaign for self-sufficiency in food. We
have achieved favorable balance of trade for the first time in postwar years which is a definitive
index of our economic growth. The nation was thrilled by the discovery of oil in Cebu which,
together with steel, will give revolutionary impetus to our agro-industrial economy. Oil will soon
be a mighty pillar of our economy. We launched the first ship built by Filipino naval architects
and engineers which established once and for all our capacity in this field. This is significant and
inspiring when we consider that we are a country of 7,000 islands. We have successfully
conducted a peaceful, free and honest election in which the Filipino people reiterated confidence
in the present Nacionalista administration. It was an untrammeled expression of the popular will
and the overall result was the strengthening of the fabric of Philippine democracy. We have just
laid the cornerstone of a Nuclear Center made possible by the United States granting us an
Atomic Reactor. We have thus been ushered into the threshold of a spectacular industrial
revolution with the use of atomic energy.
All of these achievements in the past year, to mention only the most outstanding, are at the same
time pledges at a bigger tomorrow.
THE “FILPINO FIRST” POLICY
The ”Filipino First” policy of this administration received a resounding popular indorsement in
the last election. Politically we became independent since 1946, but economically we are still
semi-colonial. This is especially true in our foreign trade. This policy is therefore designed to
regain economic independence. It is a national effort to the end that Filipinos obtain major and
dominant participation in their own national economy. This we will achieve with malice towards
none and with fairness to all. We will accomplish this with full understanding of our international
obligations towards our friends of the Free World. We will carry this out within the framework of
our special relations with the United States to whose citizens we granted until 1974, by
Constitutional provision, equal rights as Filipinos in the exploitation of our natural resources and
public utilities, and to whom we also granted trading parity rights under the Laurel-Langley
Agreement. Under this policy we will welcome friendly and understanding foreign capital
willing to collaborate with us in the exploitation of our vast natural resources preferably on joint
venture basis.
It is my hope that legislations under this orientation will be enacted this
year. ECONOMIC PROGRESS
In vital matters related to the national economy, at the start of last year, we were facing serious
difficulties. The international reserve stood at a dangerously low level and the financial position
of the government was weak. So when I came before Congress to speak on the state of the
nation, I proposed bold and decisive moves to stabilize the economy.
329
Congress in a historic special session patriotically responded by exacting a stabilization program
the principal feature of which is the imposition of a margin fee on the sale of foreign exchange.
In the middle of July a 25 per cent margin was put into effect.
It speaks highly of the courageous statesmanship of this Congress that in spite of a stormy
opposition accompanied by gloomy predictions of the prophets of doom, it passed the measure
even in an election year.
Now after barely five months of implementation thereof we find that we were able not only to
halt the country’s deteriorating balance of payments, but also to reverse it for the first time in
postwar years from minus to plus, The 25 per cent margin on foreign exchange sales combined
with the other disinflationary fiscal and credit restraint measures such as new tax laws, the
cutback in bond financing, and such monetary instruments as the raising of reserve requirements,
the raising of rediscount rates, selective rediscounting, the imposition of portfolio ceilings, and
the continued effectively of Central Bank Circular No. 79, have produced general salutary effects
upon our national economy. Among these are: (1) the strengthening of the peso, (2) the
strengthening of our international reserve to the tune of $162.9 million, (3) the consolidation of
the government’s financial position, (4) the cutting down of excessive money supply, (5) the
keeping down of excess bank reserves and credit, and (6), worthy of repeated mention, the
attainment for the first time in postwar history of a favorable balance of trade and balance of
payments to the tune of $46.4 million. Moreover, we paid in 1959, $84 million of our foreign
loans and obligations.
Rural Development
Greater efforts should be made to diffuse the benefits and balance the economic development
among the rural regions of the country. During the past year, I consistently advocated the
dispersal of industries to the provinces to halt the dangerous tendency of overcrowded population
in cities and to stop inflation of monetary circulation in Manila and suburbs while there was
scarcity of money in the provinces.
The success of our program of self-sufficiency may be gauged by the increasing surpluses of rice
and corn. Such surpluses have not only introduced price and marketing problems but also
necessitate the reorientation of our production policies along the following lines: (1) redirection
of our research activities towards high-yielding varieties suitable to the needs of foreign markets;
(2) further studies in the development of new industrial uses of agricultural surpluses and raw
materials; (3) improvement in our management practices so as to increase the production per
hectare and thereby reduce the cost per unit of output; and (4) attunement of production to
market demands so as to avoid undisposable surpluses and achieve steady and fair income for
farmers. For instance, some Virginia tobacco lands in the Ilocos provinces, in the face of a
330
soaring tobacco surplus, may be shifted to cotton production needed by our expanding textile
mills.
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
We have continued to extend the benefits of education to an increasing number of children. Last
year we were able to admit 119,000 new pupils by opening 3,000 additional classes. However,
because of budgetary limitations, the Government has had to fall back upon private institutions
to supplement its educational efforts. To maintain the highest standards possible in these schools,
an increase in the supervisory force would be desirable.
The teaching of science and mathematics as well as the improvement of the vocational curricula
received greater impetus during the year. Radio broadcasts through a donation of 500 transistor
radios from the Australian Government were started this year. The production of foodstuffs, as
well as the promotion of home industries, has been pushed with greater vigor.
The creation of the National Science Development Board has given fresh impetus to the
promotion of science and technology. Its research activities are geared to economic development
and national health. For the first time all the research projects for the control of the dreaded
kadang-kadang of coconuts have been consolidated in a Research Committee under the Board.
National Defense
Aside from pursuing its primary mission, the Department of National Defense has supplemented
the rural development program of the Administration. In this connection, I wish to inform you
that plans for the implementation of the Armed Forces commission under the law to engage in
public construction, food production, land resettlement, and rural development in addition to its
inherent duties have been completed. In fact, several projects are already being actually
undertaken.
Our Armed Forces, I am proud to say, has done well in the maintenance of peace and order and
the enforcement try’s defense structure. We have every reason to be proud of the laws. It was the
principal arm of the Commission on Elections that conducted in 1959 free, peaceful, and honest
national elections. Its civilian chiefs and its general staff have accomplished much in the way of
improving the count of its officers and men. They will continue to be an invaluable asset to the
life of the nation.
Public Works
Under the retrenchment policy, the Government has confined itself to the construction and
improvement of only essential public improvements which are supportive and promotive of agro
industrial development. Nevertheless, during the calendar year 1959 the Government undertook
the construction of irrigation and water supply systems, flood control and shore protection
works, airfields and airports, ports and harbors, and roads and bridges for which we invested One
Hundred Sixty-Nine million pesos (P169 million). Worthy of note is the completion of national
and communal irrigation systems and the installation of irrigation pumps, all of which can now
irrigate about 45,000 additional hectares of agricultural land. The year 1959 also saw the virtual
completion of the construction of 768 kilometers of development highways in Mindanao.
I invite the attention of Congress to the emerging need of legislation directed towards the multi
phase utilization and exploitation of the abundant water resources of the country not only for
331
power, but also for water supply, flood control and irrigation. In this way we can maximize the
benefits for lowest cost.
In the case of other public works financed with dollar loans being extended both by the U.S.
Export-Import Bank and the Development Loan Fund for transportation projects—air, land, and
water—committed under the Eisenhower-Garcia communique on the occasion of my last state
visit to the United States, legislative measures are necessary to make available sufficient peso
support for projects already submitted to, or approved by, these lending institutions.
Health
The health of the nation has been maintained at a satisfactory level. The birth rate has shown a
considerable increase whereas the death rate has decreased. Mortality rates from the ten leading
causes of death have been reduced. All of these facts indicate an improvement in the cleanliness
and sanitation of our communities.
The policy of improving the rural health centers is being pursued without letup. To supplement
the services which have been made available to the rural areas, the help of private persons and
firms has been enlisted. Efforts are being exerted to expand hospital services in the rural areas.
332
Ramon Magsaysay, Rizal Day Speech, June 19, 1956
Recognizing the important role of Jose Rizal in the attainment of our country’s freedom,
President Ramon Magsaysay signed the Republic Act 1425 also known as the Rizal Law on June
12, 1956. Sponsored by Senator Claro M. Recto, the law requires “to include in the curricula of
all public and private schools, colleges and universities courses on the life, works and writings of
Jose Rizal, particularly his novels Noli Me Tangere and El Filibusterismo…” The enactment of
the said law was Recto’s response to the postwar social crisis of neocolonialism and colonial
mentality. The reading of Rizal’s novels according to him “would strengthen the Filipinism of the
youth and foster patriotism.”
In his speech on Rizal Day of 1956, a few days after he signed the Rizal Law, Magsaysay
emphasized the need to remember Rizal on his birthday and the importance of “living for our
country.” He highlighted the idea of “positive nationalism” that Rizal showed by understanding
the social problem and presenting solutions to these challenges.
Rizal Day Speech
of
His Excellency Ramon Magsaysay
President of the Philippines
Before the Lions Clubs
[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, June 19, 1956]
LION CHAIRMAN MARIANING DEL ROSARIO,
DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE MANILA BAY AREA LIONS
CLUBS, MY FRIENDS:
PERMIT me to thank the officers and members of the Bay Area Lions Clubs for this privilege of
addressing you on this day. You are to be commended for stressing with this celebration the
significance of the anniversary of the birthday of Jose Rizal.
Indeed, it is time perhaps that our people should give to the day of his birth the same attention
and importance that we give to the day of his death, for there are many things about Rizal that we
can learn by reflection on his life which we might miss in reflecting on the tragedy and the glory
of his death.
The recent generations of our people have had many occasions in which to die for our country.
When those times have come, it has been the heroism of Rizal in the face of death that inspired
them in battle or in the face of the executioner.
Today, however, you will perhaps agree with me that we are mainly concerned with living for
our country. We are concerned with giving life, a decent life, to the millions of our people. We
333
are concerned with giving life and strength to our national freedom and individual liberties. We
are concerned with giving life to our Constitution and to the laws that our own free
representatives have enacted for our welfare.
In implementing this concern the question that we ask about Rizal is not so much “how did he
die?” as “how did he live?” And this day is a good day in which to seek the answer.
How did Rizal live? Perhaps we should first ask—What did he live for? Rizal lived for his
country. How did he live for his country? He lived for it first by understanding the problems of
the Philippines of his day. He faced the realities which the forces of his country had created
around him. He singled out the enemies of his country’s freedom. And then he chose the most
effective weapons with which to conquer them. He learned how to wield these weapons. And
finally he used them effectively and decisively to defeat the enemy and bring freedom to his
people.
What do we not find in Rizal’s life? We do not find him fighting the battles of Lapu-Lapu with
16th century swords or haranguing his countrymen with the rough, rustic eloquence of Dagohoy.
We find him fighting the enemies of his time with the weapons of his time, with the polished
satire of the19th century, seeking thereby not only to awaken the spirit of his own countrymen
but also to stir up the sympathy of the most cultured centers of Europe towards the cause of his
country’s freedom. Such was the realism of Rizal. Such was the constructive bent of his
patriotism. Such was the positive spirit of his nationalism.
Indeed, in every period of a country’s history, it is true nationalism that gives its people that
necessary energy with which to conquer the problems of their times. It is the realistic,
constructive, and the positive nationalism of Rizal which, by facing present problems with
present solutions, will propel us in the right direction towards the security, the prosperity, and the
happiness of our people.
What are our problems today? They are to permit the enjoyment of the fruits of our freedom by
as many of our countrymen as possible, to harness our resources and gather economic strength
with which to support that freedom, and to prepare ourselves to defend that freedom against the
forces that threaten to destroy it.
We can inspire ourselves to solve these problems by recalling the principles of our dead heroes.
But we cannot actually solve them by using obsolete weapons, recalling old hatreds and
resurrecting buried enemies. We can, like Rizal, learn from the past without reviving the
problems of the past and without shadow boxing with the spirit of the vanquished foe.
It would be wrong, for instance to approach our coming relations with Japan by recalling our
hatred of the Japanese militarist even though it was barely ten years ago that we suffered under
his yoke. Let us recall that Rizal himself had a high respect for the intrinsic humaneness of the
Japanese people.
As with the ten year old hatreds, so must we deal with the older ones. Let us nourish in our hearts
a love for our country that looks forward. Let us nurture a love that builds and will not destroy
the very things that support our freedom. Rizal said “the glory of saving a country is not for him
who has contributed to its ruin . . . . Hate never produces anything but monsters; and crime,
334
nothing but criminals . . . . Love alone realizes successful works; virtue alone can save . . . .
Redemption presupposses virtue; sacrifice, love . . . .”
My friends, countless problems challenge our solution. They can be solved if we get together
inspired with love for our country and for our countrymen and if we approach them with
goodwill and without rancor or abuse.
A country can achieve lasting greatness only if that greatness is built on the sound constructive
bases of virtue, sacrifice, and love. For countries, like persons, must also be judged by the moral
code. Rizal said “If to make my country happy I should have to do evil, I would refuse to do it,
because I am sure that what is built on sand must sooner or later fall to the ground.”
If we must build for the future, we must solve the present with the solutions of our time. If we
must strengthen our freedom we must use the resources at hand. If we must defend that freedom,
we must know who is its real enemy today and prepare to foil him with the weapons of today. If
we want to help our country, we must be prepared to sacrifice ourselves. But to sacrifice
ourselves we must be possessed of love—love for our God, our country, and our people.
If our devotion to Rizal is sincere and genuine, then we must remember, each and every one of
us, that we owe it to ourselves and to our country to seek constantly to discipline ourselves and
dedicate our efforts to our country. As Rafael Palma has said, we have a right to believe that
there is in each one of us a possible Rizal; and that what he has done, we too could do within our
reach and capabilities, if we would only apply to our tasks the same determination, the same
resolute action, the same sense of duty that Rizal applied to the most heroic acts of his life.
Let, then, this commemoration of Rizal’s 95th birthday inspire in each of us a firm determination
to dedicate ourselves anew with a chastened spirit and renewed vigor to this our beloved country
which Rizal, blessing her with his blood, has bequeathed to us, for us to love, to dignify, and to
serve.
335
Inaugural Address of President Magsaysay, December 30, 1953.
Source:https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1953/12/30/inaugural-address-of-president
magsaysay-december-30-1953/
This excerpt below shows President Magsaysay’s inaugural address. During his campaign,
Magsaysay’s image to the electorate was focused on his roots as a candidate of the common man,
and his accomplishment to put an end to the Huk rebellion. The address below resonated this
image by committing to establish a government that treats everyone fairly and justly, both the
rich and the poor. President Magsaysay made special mention to address the interest of the
common people, particularly those in barrios and neglected rural areas as well as laborers and
industrial workers through social justice programs. One of such promises in his inaugural was a
reexamination of the land reform program. On the other hand, Magsaysay announced his
commitment to the Mutual Defense Treaty with the United States as a way to uphold the
international responsibilities of the Philippines, and the aid from this international economic
cooperation with the United States shall be extended to the rural areas to aid the common people.
EXCERPT:
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
OF
HIS EXCELLENCY RAMON MAGSAYSAY
PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
[Delivered at the Independence Grandstand, Manila, on December 30,
1953] My Countrymen:
You have called upon me to assume the highest office within our gift. I accept the trust humbly
and gratefully. My sole determination is to be President for the people.
The office of President is the highest in the land. It can be the humblest also, if we regard it – as
we must – in the light of basic democratic principles. The first of these principles is the
declaration of the Constitution that “sovereignty resides in the people and all government
authority emanates form them.” This simply means that all of us in public office are but servants
of the people.
As I see it, your mandate in the past election was not a license for the selfish enjoyment of power
by any man or group of men. On the contrary, it was an endorsement of the principle – at times
forgotten – that the general welfare is the only justification for the exercise of governmental
power and authority.
336
Your mandate was a clear and urgent command to establish for our people a government based
upon honesty and morality; a government sensitive to your needs, dedicated to your best
interests, and inspired by our highest ideals of man’s liberty.
We have a glorious past. Now we must build a future worthy of that past.
It is significant that we begin on this day and on this ground hallowed by the supreme sacrifice of
Jose Rizal. We can find no finer example of dedication to country to light our way.
All too often, however, we speak of Rizal – and of Del Pilar, Bonifacio, Mabini, and our host of
heroes – as if their work were done, as if today their spirit had ceased to have any meaning or
value to our people. The truth is that we need their spirit now more than ever. We need it to
complete the work which they began.
We need men of integrity and faith like Rizal and Del Pilar; men of action like Bonifacio; men of
inflexible patriotism like Mabini. We need their zeal, their self‑reliance, their capacity for work,
their devotion to service, their ability to lose themselves in the common cause of building a
nation.
I will have such men. From this day, the members of my administration, beginning with myself,
shall cease to belong to our parties, to our families, even to ourselves. We shall belong only to
the people.
In the administration of public affairs, all men entrusted with authority must adhere firmly to the
ideals and principles of the Constitution.
I will render – and demand – uncompromising loyalty to the basic tenet of our Constitution; that
you, the people, are sovereign. The rule of government must be service to you.
Accordingly, I pledge my administration to your service. I pledge that we shall extend the
protection of the law to everyone, fairly and impartially – to the rich and the poor, the learned
and the unlettered – recognizing no party but the nation, no family but the great family of our
race, no interest save the common welfare.
The Bill of Rights shall be for me and the members of my administration, a bill of duties. We
shall be guardians of the freedom and dignity of the individual.
More than this, we shall strive to give meaning and substance to the liberties guaranteed by our
Constitution – by helping our citizens to attain the economic well‑being so essential to the
enjoyment of civil and political rights.
337
The separation of powers ordained by our Constitution – as an effective safeguard against
tyranny – shall be preserved zealously. Mutual respect for the rights and prerogative of each of
the three great departments of government must be observed.
The legislative power vested by the Constitution, in the elected representatives of the people will,
I trust, operate vigorously to prosecute our common program of honest, efficient and constructive
government. As Executive, I look forward to intimate cooperation with the members of
Congress, particularly with those statesmen who have stood guard over the rights and liberties of
our people.
The independence of the judiciary shall be strengthened. Our courts must be freed from political
and other baneful influences, so that they may function with the same integrity and impartially
which have made our Supreme Court the fortress of law and justice.
Heretofore, social justice has raised fervent but frustrated hopes in the hearts of our less fortunate
citizens. We must not permit social justice to be an empty phrase in our Constitution. We must
bring it to life – for all.
In consonance with this purpose, my administration shall take positive, energetic measures to
improve the living conditions of our fellow citizens in the barrios and neglected rural areas and
of laborers in our urban and industrial centers.
The land tenure system of our country shall be reexamined, to purge it of injustice and
oppression.
“Land for the landless” shall be more than just a catch‑phrase. We will translate it into actuality.
We will clear and open for settlement our vast and fertile public lands which, under the coaxing
of willing hearts and in dustrious hands, are waiting to yield substance to millions of our
countrymen.
Democracy becomes meaningless if it fails to satisfy the primary needs of the common man, if it
cannot give him freedom from fear and on which a strong republic can be built. His happiness
and security are the only foundations on which a strong republic can be built. His happiness and
security shall be foremost among the goals of my administration.
We must develop the national economy so that it may better satisfy the material needs of our
people. The benefits of any economic or industrial development program shall be channeled first
to our common people, so that their living standards shall be raised.
While I shall give priority to our domestic problems, my administration will not neglect our
international resp onsibilities. We cannot escape the fact that, today, the destinies of nations are
closely linked. It is in this spirit that we regard the goodwill and assistance extended to us
through the various programs of international economic cooperation with the more developed
338
nations, chiefly the United States. Considering this aid to be primarily a means of speeding up
our progress toward self‑reliance, I pledge that every peso worth of assistance will be spent
honestly and to the best advantage.
It is to our common interest that this Republic, a mo nument to mutual goodwill and common
labor, should prove to the world the vitality of the democracy by which we live.
We shall continue to cooperate with the United Nat ions in seeking collective security and a just
world peace.
No effect will be spared, no element of cooperation will be withheld in strengthening and
safeguarding our physical security. We are prepared to live up to all our obligations under our
Mutual Defense Treaty with the United States.
To our Asian brothers, we send our fraternal greetings. They are beset by problems of the same
nature and complexity as those that confront us. We invite them to share our experience in
finding solutions to those problems through democratic means. It is my hope that we can
exchange experiences and information on methods that each of us has found most effective in
subduing illiteracy, poverty, disease, under-productivity, and other common evils which have
afflicted our countries of past generations.
The problems and opportunities ahead of us set the measure of the effort we must exert in the
years to come. We must have unity to solve our problems, cooperation to exploit our
opportunities. I urge you to forego partisan differences whenever the national interest clearly
demands united action. We must not be distracted from our work. We have no time for petty
strife.
Certainly we cannot temporize with armed dissidence. I therefore call upon the remnants of the
Huk uprising still hiding in the hills to lay down their arms – and rejoin the rest of the nation in
the ways of peace. I say to the rank and file of the Huks – who have been misled by the lies of
the Kremlin – that they can win the economic security and social justice they desire only within
the framework of our democracy. We shall welcome back the truly repentant with understanding
and with sympathy.
But, to the leaders of the Communist conspiracy who would deliver this country and its people to
a foreign power, this I say: I shall use all the forces at my command to the end that the sovereign
authority of this government shall be respected and maintained. There can be no compromise
with disloyalty.
I have been warned that too much is expected of this administration, that our people expect the
impossible. For this young and vigorous nation of ours, nothing is really impossible!
339
Let us have faith in ourselves, the same faith that fired the heroic generation of revolution. They
waged and won their struggle with nothing but bolos in their hands and courage in their hearts.
Without political training and experience, they wrote a constitution comparable with the best,
and established the first republic in Asia. Our own generation was told by doubters and enemies
that we would never have independence from the United States. We live today under a free and
sovereign Republic. Our faith was fulfilled.
Today, we are told anew that it is impossible to do what must be done. But our people, sustained
by God, under whose protection we have placed our destiny and happiness, and strengthened by
an abiding faith in His goodness and mercy – our people, united and free, shall shape a future
worthy of our noble heritage if we but act; act together; act wisely; act with courage; and act
unselfishly, in a spirit of patriotic dedication.
340
"1947 RP-US Military Bases Agreement" Accessed November 21, 2020.
Source: https://www.loc.gov/law/help/us-treaties/bevans/b-ph-ust000011-0055.pdf.
The agreement between the Philippines and the United States concerning military bases also
known as the Military Bases Agreement was signed on March 14, 1947 by Manuel Roxas on
behalf of the Philippine Government and by Ambassador Paul V. McNutt on behalf of the
President of the United States. This agreement gave the US a 99-year lease on a number of
military and naval bases in the Philippines. The two major facilities included Clark Air Base in
Pampanga and the Subic Naval Base which included the whole city of Olongapo within its
jurisdiction. This agreement placed no restrictions to which the US could put the bases nor the
types of weapons it could store there. It also allowed US to recruit Filipino volunteers into the
US Armed Forces.
Over the years, some of the provisions of the said agreement have been revised. Among the
important changes included the returning of base lands to the Philippine government including
the city of Olongapo. In 1966, the term of agreement was changed to expire in 1991. EXCERPT:
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND
THE REPUBLIC
OF THE PHILIPPINES CONCERNING MILITARY BASES
WHEREAS, the war in the Pacific has confirmed the mutuality of interest of
the United States of America and of the Republic of the Philippines in matters
relating to the defense of their respective territories and that mutuality of interest
demands that the Governments of the two countries take the necessary measures
to promote their mutual security and to defend their territories and areas;
WHEREAS, the governments of the United States of America and of the
Republic of the Philippines are desirous of cooperating in the common defense of
their two countries through arrangements consonant with the procedures and
objectives of the United Nations, and particularly through a grant to the United
States of America by the Republic of the Philippines in the exercise of its title and
sovereignty, of the use, free of rent, in furtherance of the mutual interest of both
countries, of certain lands of the public domain;
341
WHEREAS, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines has re- quested
United States assistance in providing for the defense of the Philippines and in
developing for such defense effective Philippine armed forces;
WHEREAS, pursuant to this request the Government of the United States of
America has, in view of its interest in the welfare of the Philippines, indicated its
intention of dispatching a military mission to the Philippines and of extending to
her appropriate assistance in the development of the Philippine defense forces;
WHEREAS, a Joint Resolution of the Congress of the United States of
America of June 29, 1944,“ authorized the President of the United States of
America to acquire bases for the mutual protection of the United States of
America and of the Philippines; and
WHEREAS, Joint Resolution No. 4 of the Congress of the Philippines,
approved July 28, 1945,“ authorized the President of the United States of America
to negotiate with the President of the Philippines for the establishment of bases
provided for in the Joint Resolution of the Congress of the United States of
America of June 29, 1944, with a view to insuring the territorial integrity of the
Philippines, the mutual protection of the United States of America and the
Philippines, and the maintenance of peace in the Pacific;
THEREFORE, the governments of the Republic of the Philippines and of the
United States of America agree upon the following terms for the delimitation,
establishment, maintenance and operation of military bases in the Philippines:
