A few days afterward, Don Estevan Taes, chief of Bulacan, came to the village of Tondo
where they were. He conferred with Don Martin Panga; and they decided that since the
Englishman had not come, and the compact made at the meeting of Tambobo had not been
carried out, they should call another meeting to discuss what had been planned at the former one.
To this end, he offered to notify and call together all the chiefs from his village as far as Tondo,
while Don Martin Panga was to summon the other chiefs as far as Cavite. To this end, the said
Don Martin Panga said that he would carry a letter to the governors of Malolos and Guiguinto,
and tell them to hasten to the meeting; and that, when they were assembled, he could
53
communicate to them the bad or the good which he kept within his breast. After Don Esteban
Tael had told him to leave the matter in his hands, Don Martin Panga declared, in the presence of
Pitongatan, that he and Don Agustin had planned to call together the men of La Laguna and
Comitan; and that, when the people were all gathered, they would discuss the means of regaining
the freedom and lordship which their fathers had enjoyed before them; and, with all the people
collected at Tondo, would attack Manila, as arranged with Balaya, chief of Vangos, and with the
natives of Batan. It seems that the said meeting did not take place, on account of various
occupations which detained the said chiefs. Moreover, it appears that about the same time, when
certain Indian chiefs of Panpanga came to Manila on business connected with their province, on
passing through the village of Tondo, Don Agustin Panga summoned them; and he, together with
Don Agustin de Legaspi, Sagat Malagat, and Amanicalao, talked with them, and inquired after
the business that took them to Manila. The chiefs answered that they came to entreat the
governor to command the cessation of the lawsuits concerning slaves in Panpanga, until they
could gather in the harvest. Don Martin said that this was very good, and that they also wished to
make the same entreaty and to bring their slaves to court; but that to attain this it would be best to
assemble and choose a leader from among them, whom they should swear to obey in everything
as a king, in order that none should act alone. The chiefs of Panpanga said that they had [no] war
with the Spaniards, to cause them to plot against the latter, and that they had a good king. Thus,
they did not consent to what was asked from them by the aforesaid chiefs, and proceeded to
Manila in order to transact their business. In Manila they were again invited to go to Tondo, to
take food with the plotters; but the Panpanga chiefs refused. On the same day a meeting was held
in Tondo by Don Agustin de Legaspi and Don Martin Panga; Don Luis Balaya, chief of Bangos;
Agustin Lea and Alonso Digma, his nephews; Don Phelipe Salalila and Don Agustin Manuguit,
his son; Don Luis Amanicalao, and Calao, his son; Don Grabiel Tuambacar, Don Francisco Acta,
Don Phelipe Salonga, and other natives who rendered service. While they were thus assembled,
they all resolved and agreed, amid the usual drinking, that the above-mentioned Magat should go
to the Calamianes and from that place notify the Borneans to come to Manila to attack the
Spaniards; and the chiefs would wait for them here, and would take care to receive and help
them. In fulfilment of this, the said chief Magat Salamat went to the Calamianes, which are near
the kingdom of Burney, taking with him the chiefs Don Agustin Manuguit and Don Joan Banal.
Thence he went to the island of Cuyo, where it seems that he discussed the matter with
Sumaelob, chief of the said island, and persuaded him to come with the Borneans to plunder
Manila. At that time, he was arrested for this trial, was brought to this city, and openly confessed
that what has been said actually occurred. The said inquiries and investigations made in reference
to the trial of the aforesaid persons were examined by the governor and captain-general; and he
gave orders to arrest those who appeared guilty, in the various regions and provinces in which
they were to be found, and on different days, letting no one of the guilty ones escape. The men
were arrested and their confessions were taken down separately. At the proper time and place
they were each charged with the crime which resulted against each of them; and a copy of the
charge was given to them and to their attorneys on their behalf. Their cases were received on trial
54
in a certain order and for a certain period, so as to give them, during that period, an opportunity
of clearing themselves from the charge. The time expired, and the trial was definitely closed. The
governor and captain-general reviewed the trial, and on different days pronounced a final
sentence against each one of them, according to their guilt. The sentence is in substance as
follows: Don Agustin de Legaspi and Don Martin Panga, as leaders and chiefs, and being
convicted by witnesses, were condemned to be dragged and hanged; their heads were to be cut
off and exposed on the gibbet in iron cages, as an example and warning against the said crime.
All their goods were to be confiscated and set apart, half for the royal treasury and half for
judicial expenses. The above-mentioned appealed from the aforesaid sentence to the royal
Audiencia of these islands; but after having examined the trial, the Audiencia confirmed the
aforesaid sentence, and returned the case to the governor and captain-general in order that justice
might be done. The death-punishment was to cut their heads off and to expose them on the gibbet
in iron cages. The sites of their houses were to be plowed and sown with salt. All their property,
after the judicial expenses had been defrayed, should be set aside for the royal treasury. This
sentence was executed upon the abovementioned persons as here stated.
55
Insurrections by Filipinos in the Seventeenth Century
This is an excerpt of an account by various 17thcentury chroniclers and collected by Blair
and Robertson in Volume 38 of The Philippine Islands, Pp. 87-240. The reading discusses
two rebellions led by the Babaylan Tamblot and the old chief of Limasawa Bankaw. The
account shows the struggles of our ancestors to preserve their beliefs and traditions against
the onslaught of Spanish Christianization. Naturally, the Spaniards would portray their
efforts as the efforts of the devil to lead the people to apostasy and rebellion. Also included
is the account of Pedro Ladia’s rebellion centered in Malolos, Bulacan. Being much of a
religious rebellion, Ladia would also attempt to establish a kingdom based on the Tagalog
area in which Malolos is a part.
Excerpt:
The majority of the ministers in the island of Bohol had gone to Zebu, to celebrate the feasts of
the beatification of St. Xavier; in their absence Lucifer attempted to possess himself again of
those souls. The divata, or demon, appeared to some Indians in the woods—its face covered, like
that of one taking the discipline—and commanded them to quit the gospel ministers and the
Spanish vassalage, and take refuge in the hills; and to build him a chapel, where he would aid
them and give them whatever they needed to pass their lives in happiness and abundance,
without the encumbrance of paying tribute to the Spaniards or dues to the churches. Two or three
Indians, who on account of their evil deeds were wandering as fugitives, became priests of this
divata, in order to persuade the people to apostasy and rebellion; and, to take away the fear which
they naturally feel toward the Spaniards, these priests told them that, if they would attack the
Spaniards, the divata would cause the mountains to rise against their foe; that the muskets of the
latter would not go off, or else the bullets would rebound on those who fired them; that if any
Indian should die, the demon would resuscitate him; that the leaves of the trees would be
converted into saranga (which is a large fish); that when they cut bejucos, these would distill
wine instead of water; that from the banana-leaves they would make fine linen; and, in short, that
all would be pleasure, enjoyment, and delight. With these magnificent promises, so attractive to
men—and especially to the Indians, who are so inclined to idleness and sloth—four villages
revolted; only Loboc (which is the chief village) and Baclayon remained firm in the faith, and in
loyalty to the king.
Information of this reached Zebu, and immediately Don Juan de Alcarazo, alcalde-mayor of
Zebu, went to quiet the island; he invited them to make peace, for which the rebels did not care.
Their boldness increasing, they burned the four villages and their churches; they flung on the
ground the rosaries and crosses, and pierced an image of the blessed Virgin eighteen times with
javelins—although afterward in Zebu some tried to make amends to her with the most
affectionate demonstrations of reverence, and she was placed in our church. Thereupon the chief
56
ordered troops from Zebu, fifty Spaniards and a thousand friendly Indians, accompanied by a
father; and on New Year’s Day, 1622, he began the march to the mountains, where the insurgents
were. For five days they traveled through rugged hills and deep ravines, crossing marshes where
the mud came to their knees, or even to their waists, and shedding their blood on the thorns and
briars. On the fifth day, the insurgents killed a friendly Indian; this they celebrated with loud
shouts, and it greatly increased their arrogance. On the following day, more than 1,500 rebel
Indians attacked our vanguard, which consisted of sixteen Spaniards and three hundred Indians;
but when our muskets were fired so many fell dead that the rebels began to retreat to a bamboo
thicket. When we followed them, a heavy rain fell, which encouraged the rebels, for they said
that our muskets were then useless. But Heaven favored our cause with a marvel, since, although
the pans of the musket-locks were full of water, the soldiers declared that the powder never failed
to catch fire, nor did the matches go out. At this the rebels fled into the mountains; and our men
arrived at a village of more than a thousand houses, in the midst of which was the temple of their
divata. Our troops found there much food, various jewels of silver and gold, and many bells of
the sort those people use—all which was given to our Indians. The rebels were in a fortification
of stone, in which they had placed many stones and clods of earth to throw at our men; but the
latter, covering themselves with their shields, seized the redoubt, with the death of many of the
enemy, and in a fortnight returned to Loboc. Captain Alcarazo, who was foremost in all these
engagements, commanded that some of the rebels be hanged, and published a pardon to the rest;
and he returned to Zebu, where the victory was celebrated. This success had very important
results, for it checked the revolt of other islands and other villages—who were expecting the
favorable result which the demon had promised them, so that they could shake off the mild yoke
of Christ, and with it their vassalage to the Spaniards. Many of them, now undeceived, accepted
the pardon; but others, who were stubborn, fortified themselves at the summit of a rugged and
lofty hill, difficult of access, and closed the road [to it] with brambles and thorns. They also filled
the paths with very sharp stakes driven into the soil, and placed among the branches of the trees
many crossbows, in order that these, being discharged as our men passed them, might wound the
soldiers; and above they provided many stones to throw at the Spaniards, hurling them from the
top of the hill. Six months later the same Don Juan Alcarazo returned, to dislodge those rebels
with forty Spaniards and many Indians. After suffering great hardships in making the paths
accessible, nearly all his men were hurt, by the time they reached the fort, by the many stones
which the enemy hurled down from the summit; but our soldiers courageously climbed the
ascent, firing their muskets, and killed many of the rebels, putting the rest to flight. Thus, was
dispersed that sedition, which was one of the most dangerous that had occurred in the islands—
not only because the Boholanos were the most warlike and valiant of the Indians, but on account
of the conspiracy spreading to many other tribes. Noble examples of fidelity in this great
disturbance are not lacking.
The natives of Carigara in the island of Leyte became impatient, and revolted without waiting for
the result in Bohol, incited thereto by Bancao, the ruling chief of Limasava—who in the year
57
1565 received with friendly welcome Miguel Lopez de Legazpi and the Spaniards who came to
his island, supplying them with what they needed, for which Phelipe II sent him a royal decree,
thanking him for the kind hospitality which he showed to those first Spaniards. He was baptised
and, although a young man, showed that he was loyal to the Christians; but, conquered by the
enemy [of souls], he changed sides in his old age. This man lived in the island of Leyte, and with
a son of his and another man, Pagali (whom he chose as priest of his idolatry), erected a sacred
place to the divata, or devil; and they induced six villages in the island to rebel. In order to
remove from them their fear of the Spaniards, these men told their followers that they could
change the Spaniards into stones as soon as they saw them, by repeating the word bato, which
signifies “stone;” and that a woman or a child could change them into clay by flinging earth upon
them. Father Melchor de Vera went to Zebu to give warning of this sedition and obtain aid to
check it. Captain Alcarazo equipped an armada of forty vessels, in which were embarked some
Spaniards and many friendly Indians, also the father rector of Zebu and Father Vera; these united
with the forces (both Spanish and Indian) that the alcalde of Leyte had. They offered peace to the
rebels, but the latter spurned it with contempt. Our men, divided into three bodies, attacked them;
and, when that which Don Juan de Alcarazo commanded came in sight of the rebels, they fled to
the hills. Our soldiers followed them, and on the way put to the sword or shot those whom they
encountered; and, although the compassion of the Spaniards spared the children and women,
these could not escape the fury of the Indians. Many of the rebels died, the enchantment not
availing them by which they had thought to turn the Spaniards into stone or clay; the rest saved
themselves by flight. The Spaniards came to a large building which the rebels had erected for
their divata; they encamped in it ten days, and then burned it. Someone pierced with a lance
Bancao, the chief instigator of the rebellion, not knowing who he was, whom two of his slaves
were carrying on their shoulders and immediately his head was placed on a stake as a public
warning. He and his children came to a wretched end, as a punishment for their infidelity and
apostasy; for his second son was beheaded as a traitor, and a daughter of his was taken captive.
To inspire greater terror, the captain gave orders to shoot three or four rebels, and to burn one of
their priests—in order that, by the light of that fire, the blindness in which the divata had kept
them deluded might be removed. The Spaniards also cut off the head of an Indian who had
robbed Father Vinancio [i.e., Vilancio] and broken to pieces an image of the Virgin, and kicked a
crucifix; and his head was set up in the same place where he had committed those horrible
sacrileges. There were many who, in the midst of so furious a tempest, remained constant in their
religious belief.
This fearful earthquake was general in all these Filipinas, although it was more severe in
some regions than in others—for in the province of Cagayán, in [the land of] one people called
Maynanes, a great mountain was cleft open; and the havoc made by it extended as far as Maluco.
In the heights of Gapang, in the province of Pampanga, it was very severe, and lasted several
days. Even greater damage might have been done by an uprising that was plotted by an Indian of
evil disposition in the villages of Gapang, Santor, Caranglán, and Patabangán, exhorting the
58
natives there to rebel and restore themselves to their former liberty, by slaying the Spaniards and
the religious. He assured them that in Manila there were no Spaniards left, because the earth had
swallowed them, with the entire city, on the night of the earthquake that occurred on St.
Andrew’s day; and that the demon, with whom he had compact and intercourse, had promised
him that he would aid the natives so that they might maintain themselves without paying tribute,
and might enjoy much prosperity, and provided that they would slay the fathers and burn the
churches. The delusion of the Indians of Gapang went so far that they seized arms, and
summoned to their aid many heathen Zambals, and burned the churches of Santor and
Pantabangán. When this was known in Manila, the encomendero of those villages, Admiral
Rodrigo de Mesa, offered his services to pacify them, and went to Gapang with Alférez Callejas,
their collectors of tribute, and some friendly Indians; but the insurgents, who now were
numerous, badly wounded the encomendero, who fled on horseback, and a year later died from
that wound at Manila. They slew Alférez Callejas and many of the loyal Indians who went in his
company, and fortified themselves in the mountains. The prior and minister, Fray Juan Cabello,
escaped by the aid of some other Indians who were not of the hostile party, came to Manila, and
gave information of the progress of the rebellion. Opinions differed as to the methods which
should be employed in pacifying the insurgents; and our father provincial, Fray Alonso Carbajal,
decided to send the father lecturer Fray Juan de Abarca, a religious for whom the natives of that
district had much affection and respect, since he had been their minister for many years. With
this commission this religious set out for Pampanga, taking with him a companion, Master-of
camp Don Agustin Songsong, a valiant Pampango, with as many soldiers of that people as
seemed necessary. They arrived at Gapang, and by means of father Fray Juan de Abarca’s
preaching and his earnest efforts—which would take too long to relate, as would the many perils
of death to which he exposed himself—that sedition was finally quelled, and the insurgents
returned to their former quiet. But the Indian sorcerer, the cause of this disturbance, did not make
his appearance, notwithstanding all the efforts that were made to find him.
Another rebellion, which threatened a great outbreak, was checked (in the year 1643) by father
Fray Cristobal Enriquez. In the district of Malolos in the province of Bulacán, an Indian named
Don Pedro Ladía, a native of Borney, went about promoting sedition; he proclaimed that to him
belonged the right of being king over the provinces of Tagalos, alleging that he was a descendant
of Raja Matanda, the petty king whom the Spaniards found at Manila in the year 1571. With
these and other impostures, aided by wine—the chief counselor in matters of policy and war,
among those natives—and with the consultations with the demon which always figure on these
occasions, he kept many villages of that district disquieted. But the sagacious procedure of father
Fray Cristobal Enriquez intercepted all these misfortunes which were threatening us, by
furnishing a plan for the arrest of Don Pedro Ladía—who already was styling himself “king of
the Tagálogs;” he was sent to Manila, where, he paid with his life for his vain presumption. And
thus, this revolt, lacking even that weak foundation, was entirely quieted.
59
La Democracia
The following document is a decree published in the Manila newspaper La Democracia
which is the organ of the Partido Federal, on November 25, 1901. The account shows the
roots of the agricultural problems of the Philippines which stretched out well into the 20th
century until the present. This paper was provided by a certain Hugo Salazar, a member of
the Partido Federal, with his own comments. It reiterates that the friars usurped not only
the lands of individuals, but those of the State.
Excerpt:
To the president and auditors of my royal Audiencia of the Filipinas Islands, resident in the city
of Manila: Don Pedro Enriquez, an auditor of that same Audiencia, made a report, with sworn
statements of his proceedings; of what he had done under the commission which was conferred
on him by the government there for the pacification of the villages of Taguig, Hagonoy,
Parañaque, Bacoor, Cavite el Viejo, and other places attached to them which lie near that capital,
all which had revolted. [He reported that] they were pacified by merely the proclamation of a
general pardon (except to the chief instigators of the revolt) which he published, and by the
promise that their complaints should be heard and justice done to them; but the village of San
Mateo also revolted, and he proceeded to its punishment and left it in ruins, because the people
had not surrendered their arms; it was, however, already [re]peopled, with inhabitants who were
more numerous and of more peaceable disposition. A similar insurrection or revolt occurred in
most of the villages of the province of Bulacan, and these, like the former, by an agreement
which they had formed by a public writing with the village of Silang protested, as they afterward
made evident in their petitions, against the injuries which the Indians received from the managers
of the estates which are owned by the religious of St. Dominic and those of St. Augustine, both
calced and discalced—usurping the lands of the Indians, without leaving them the freedom of the
rivers for their fishing, or allowing them to cut wood for their necessary use, or even to collect
the wild fruits; nor did they allow the natives to pasture on the hills near their villages the
carabaos which they used for agriculture. Accordingly [the said auditor] determined to free them
from these oppressions, and decided that they should not pay various unjust taxes which the
managers exacted from them. Having proved to be capable in the other task assigned him, he
received a commission as subdelegate judge of the adjustment of land-titles, in consequence of
which he demanded from the aforesaid religious orders the titles of ownership for the lands
which they possessed; and, notwithstanding the resistance that they made to him, repeatedly
refusing [to obey], he distributed to the villages the lands which the orders had usurped, and all
which they held without legitimate cause he declared to be crown lands [realengas]—as occurred
with the convent of San Pablo, belonging to the calced religious of St. Augustine, assigning to it
[i.e., the crown] a farm for horned cattle and two caballerías of land which were supposed to
belong to it, according to the testimony of the village of San Mateo. He also took other measures
which seemed to him proper for the investigation of the fraudulent proceedings in the
60
measurement of the lands in the estate of Biñan, which is owned by the religious of St. Dominic
—fraud which was committed in the year 1743 by the court clerk of that Audiencia [of Manila]
with notable fraud and trickery, in which participated the two surveyors (appointed through
ignorance or evil intent), to the grave injury of the village of Silang. This had caused the
disturbances, revolts, and losses which had been experienced in the above-mentioned villages.
The aforesaid proceedings [by the auditor] were considered and examined with the closest
attention in my Council of the Indias, with the decrees that were also sent by the Audiencia there
in the course of the proceedings in a second appeal interposed by the village of Silang—decrees
obtained in that suit by the natives of that village against the college of Santo Tomas de Aquino,
in regard to lands usurped [from them] and annexed to the estate of Biñan, which the religious
own. On the subject of the disturbance among the aforesaid Indians, Governor Don Gaspar de la
Torre, his successor the bishop of Nueva Segovia, and the provincials of the aforesaid religious
orders set forth the allegations made in the name of the orders by father Fray Miguel Vivas as
their procurator-general at this court, and by Father Pedro Altamirano, who acts in that capacity
for the Society of Jesus for its provinces of the Indias (on the point that the province of San
Ignacio in those islands had no share in the commotions in those villages, as was shown by
various testimonies), and the explanations made by my fiscal, who was cognizant of the whole
matter. It has therefore appeared expedient to me to advise you of the receipt of your letters of
July 30, 1745, and July 17, 1746, and of the acts which accompany them; and to notify you that
by a despatch of this date I approve, and regard as just and proper, all that was performed by the
aforesaid Don Pedro Calderon Enriquez in virtue of the commission and appointment which was
conferred upon him by Governor Don Gaspar de la Torre by the advice of the Audiencia there, in
order that he might proceed to the pacification of the insurgent villages in the jurisdictions of
Silang, Imus and San Nicolas, Cavite el Viejo, and the other districts which united on account of
the controversy over the ownership of the lands which the religious—Dominicans, and both
calced and discalced Augustinians—are endeavoring to keep. I also give him thanks for the
judicious conduct and measures which he employed for the aforesaid pacification; and I likewise
approve what he accomplished as subdelegate judge of the settlement of land-titles, in regard to
the survey and boundaries of the estates which, in accordance with their legitimate titles, belong
to each of those orders, in view of the more accurate and reliable information [obtained] from the
interpretations of the four surveyors whom he appointed—the latter bearing in mind, to this end,
the measures put into execution by the auditor Ozaeta in the year 1699, in accordance with the
chart printed by the pilot Bueno, in his book entitled Navegación especulativa y practica [i.e.,
“Navigation, theoretical and practical”] (which chart serves in those islands as the standard for
the surveys)—assigning to the aforesaid religious that which belongs to them by their [legal]
titles, which is the same that was ordained in the executory decree dispatched by the Audiencia
there. I also approve what he did in adjudging to my royal crown the lands which the aforesaid
religious orders had usurped, and in allotting lands to the Indians for the sum of two thousand
pesos, at times and terms stipulated with them.
61
From the aforesaid investigations charges resulted against Don Juan Monroy, court clerk of that
Audiencia, who was engaged in the survey and adjustment of boundaries made in those same
lands of Biñan in the year 1743—in which, by the declaration of the two surveyors who took part
in it, is evident their ignorance of such work, and of the rules and measures [to be used].
Although [sc., after?] the lands had been measured and a chart of the estates had been drawn, the
computations were made by the said Monroy, and the surveyors signed it, supposing that it was
correct; but it was acknowledged that in that same year, later, another survey and adjustment of
boundaries was made by the aforesaid court clerk and one of the said surveyors on some lands
over which there were lawsuits—some, in particular, with the religious of St. Augustine—in
which survey there was assigned to each cattle-farm 3,024,574 square brazas of land, this being
different from the previous survey, which was computed at 8,695,652 brazas. In this was proved
the fraud with which the said Monroy acted, in giving to the said religious more than half of the
land which belonged to Silang. Accordingly, it has appeared to me proper to condemn him to two
years’ suspension from his office, and to lay upon him a fine of two thousand pesos, applied to
the fund of fines paid into the royal treasury; and for this exaction there is issued, on this same
date, the proper despatch to the Marqués de Regalía, a minister of the said my Council and
tribunal of the Indias, and exclusive judge of rents, settlement of land-titles, and collection of
fines and condemnations. By another despatch of the same date, the government of those islands
is commanded to exercise hereafter the utmost vigilance in order that the Indians of the said
villages may not be molested by the religious, and that the latter shall be kept in check in the
unjust acts which they may in future attempt against not only those Indians but other natives of
those islands. In this, the government must always bear in mind the reiterated commands given
in the laws [of the empire], and the frequent royal decrees that have been issued, to the end that
the Indians shall be well treated and shall not suffer oppression or extortion; and shall direct that
my fiscal there shall appear as their representative and in their defense on every occasion which
shall present itself in this regard. Considering how important it is that the Indians shall know of
the recourse which they can have when they are oppressed or ill-treated, and in their
controversies, it would be very expedient that the government give them information of this, so
that they may not be ignorant thereof, and that they may use these [peaceable] means without
going to the extreme, as they did on this occasion, by employing armed force. For this time, my
royal charity and clemency overlooks their proceedings, considering their heedless disposition;
but when they shall have been advised of what they ought to do in such cases, and in others of a
different nature, if they fail to use those means they shall be chastised with the utmost severity. I
have resolved to notify you of this, in order that you may be acquainted with this my royal
decision, and in order that, so far as you are concerned, you may make known my decree; and I
command the most prompt and effective measures, to the end that it may be fully and duly
carried into effect; for such is my will. Dated at San Lorenzo, on November 7, 1751.
I the King
