.
43
Relacion de las Islas Filipinas
This is a continuation of Chirino’s discourse on the Filipinos. Specifically, he discussed the
alphabet and writing system the Filipinos of his time. Significantly, the description is still
one of the basis of today’s studies on the baybayin.
All these islanders are much given to reading and writing, and there is hardly a man, and much
less a woman, who does not read and write in the letters used in the island of Manila--which are
entirely different from those of China, Japon, and India. This will be seen from its alphabet,
which is as follows:
The three vowels serve as five, and are:
A I O
a e i o u
The consonants are only twelve, and in writing are used with the vowels in the following
form. The letter alone with no point above or below it, is pronounced with the vowel-sound A:
BA KA DA GA HA LA MA NA PA SA TA YA
Ba ca da ga ha la ma na pa sa ta ya
By placing the point above, each is pronounced with the vowel-sound E or I:
BI KI DI GI HI LI MI NI PI SI TI YI
Bi qui di gui hi li mi ni pi si ti yi
Be que de gue he le me ne pe se te ye
44
By placing the point below, they are pronounced with the vowel-sound O or U.
BO KO DO GO HO LO MO NO PO SO TO YO
Bo co do go ho lo mo no po so to yo
Bu cu du gu hu lu mu nu pu su tu yu
Consequently, to pronounce _cama_, two letters without points are sufficient: KAMA _ca ma_.
If a point is placed above the KA we have KIMA or _que-ma. If a point is placed below each
character KOMO the word is _co-mo_.
Final consonants are suppressed in all forms of expression: accordingly
_cantar_ is written KATA _ca ta_; _barba_, BABA _ba ba_.
By means of these characters they easily make themselves understood and convey their ideas
marvelously, he who reads supplying, with much skill and facility, the consonants which are
lacking. From us they have adopted the habit of writing from left to right. Formerly they wrote
from the top to the bottom, placing the first line on the left (if I remember right), and continuing
the rest at the right, contrary to the custom of the Chinese and Japanese--who, although they
write from top to bottom, begin from the right and continue the page to the left. They used to
write on reeds and palm-leaves, using as a pen an iron point; now they write their own letters, as
well as ours, with a sharpened quill, and, as we do, on paper. They have learned our language and
its pronunciation, and write it even better than we do, for they are so clever that they learn
anything with the greatest ease. I have had letters written by themselves in very handsome and
fluent style. In Tigbauan I had in my school a very young boy, who, using as a model letters
written to me in a very good handwriting, learned in three months to write even better than I; and
he copied for me important documents faithfully, exactly, and without errors. Let this, however,
suffice for the matter of languages and letters, and let us return to our employment for souls.
45
Práctica del Ministerio
The following is an excerpt of the Augustinian Tomas Ortiz’s Practica del Ministerio.
Originally published in 1731, this particular excerpt is from the 1893 edition published by
Wenceslao E. Retana in his edition of Joaquin Martinez de Zuñiga’s Estadismo de las Islas
Filipinas. The ethnographic pattern used by Ortiz in this segment is useful in
understanding the dynamics of the conversion of the Filipinos to Christianity. The
prehispanic religious setup could be seen from his description of the “ugales” which he
equates with the “abusos” or abuses against the Catholic faith.
Excerpt:
Inasmuch as many natives, especially those of the provinces distant from Manila are
much inclined to nonos or genii, to idolatries, maganitos, superstitions, enchantments, charms,
and witchcraft, which have as great a diversity as have the witches, and therefore they call them
by different names, according to the various duties which they attribute to them; it is necessary
for the father ministers, not only to preach to them continually, and to argue against, censure, and
decry so pestilent abuses, but they must also be very skillful, solicitous, and careful in
discovering persons infected with that mortal poison, and to apply to it the necessary remedy. In
the confessions, for the same reason that but seldom will they accuse themselves all possible
efforts ought to be made (without overstepping the boundaries of prudence) in order to see
whether anything may be obtained; and he who has the good fortune to have any witch confess
to him, will bear himself toward her as the authors teach. They ought also to charge the natives
with their obligation to denounce to the ordinary, etc.
There are many abuses (or as they say ugales) which the natives practice against our holy
faith and good customs, among others of which are the following. First, the above-mentioned
idolatry of the nonos. In regard to this it must be noted that the word nono does not alone signify
“grandfather,” but that it also is used as a term of respect to the old men and genii. The Indians
comprise these under the word nono, just as the Chinese do under the word Espiritus [i. e.,
“spirits”], and the Romans under the word “Gods,” which other called Lares, Penates, etc. With
the above-mentioned genii or nonos the Indians perform many acts of idolatry frequently, such as
for example, asking permission, relief, and aid from them, and that they do the people no harm,
and that they do not prove hostile to them, etc. They make such requests on many occasions, and
among others are the following. When they wish to pluck any flower or fruit from the tree, they
ask permission from the nono or genius to pluck it. When they pass certain fields, rivers, creeks,
or streamlets, large trees, sugar-cane plantations and other places, they ask permission and good
passage from the genii or nonos. When they are obliged to cut any tree, or not to observe the
things or ceremonies which they imagine to be pleasing to the genii or nonos, they ask pardon of
46
them, and excuse themselves to those beings by saying, among many other things, that the father
commanded them to do it, and that they are not willingly lacking in respect to the genii, or that
they do not willingly oppose their will, etc. When they are taken with the sickness that they call
pamave, which they attribute to the genii or nonos (although they try to conceal this by saying
that the country [has not?] agreed with them) they ask them for health and offer them food. They
do that both on this, and many other occasions, in the fields, sugar-cane plantations, streamlets,
at the foot of any large tree, more generally some calunpan,2 and in various other places. This
sort of idolatry is very deeply rooted and of long standing among the Indians. Consequently, it is
very necessary for the father ministers to be very careful and make great efforts to extirpate it,
and not avoid any labor or work until it is annihilated.
Secondly, the Indians very generally believe that the souls of the dead return to their
houses the third day after their death, in order to visit the people of it, or to be present at the
banquet, and consequently, to be present at the ceremony of the tibao. They conceal and hide that
by saying that they are assembling in the house of the deceased in order to recite the rosary for
him. If they are told to do their praying in the church, they refuse to comply because that is not
what they wish to do. Consequently, the minister will prevent the gathering at the house of the
deceased after the burial, and will not allow the people to ascend into the house under any
considerations, least of all on the third day. On the fourth day, in consequence of the said
ceremony of the tibao, or because of their evil inclination, they light candles in order to wait for
the soul of the deceased. They spread a mat, on which they scatter ashes, so that the tracks or
footsteps of the soul may be impressed thereon; and by that means they are able to ascertain
whether the soul came or not. They also set a dish of water at the door, so that when the soul
comes it may wash its feet there. It does not appear that it would be much to say that those
matters of the nonos or genii and the deceased were taken by the Indians from the Sangleys who
are reared with various things [of belief]. It needs a strong remedy nevertheless.
The tigbalāg which some call a ghost and others a goblin, appears to be the genius or
devil, who appears to them in the shape of a black man, or in the shape of an old man (or as they
express it in the shape of a very small old man), or in the shape of a horse, or of a monster, etc.
That being inspires them with so great fear that they come to make friendship with him, and
surrender their rosaries to him, and receive from him superstitious things, such as hairs, herbs,
stones, and other things, in order that they may obtain marvelous things, and that they may be
aided by him in certain of their affairs.
The patianac whom some also call a goblin (but it is only their invention, dream, or
imagination) must be the genius or devil who generally plays with them as also with many
others, when losing the faith, they espouse his cause, become familiar with him, or become
subject to him. They attribute to this being the ill success of births, and say that in order to harm
them and cause their destruction, he enters or hides in some tree or in any other place near the
house of the woman who is about to give birth, and there they sing like those who wander about,
47
etc. In order to prevent any harm from the patianac, the men take their position naked and with
their privies exposed to the air; and arm themselves with shield, catan, lance, and other arms. In
this condition they stand on the ridgepole of the roof, and also under the house, and in all places,
they slash and cut right and left with the catan and make various gestures and set movements for
the same purpose. Others, in order to prevent said harm, generally move the woman who is about
to give birth to another house, for they say that her house contains a patianac.
Among other things they also attribute to the patianac the death of children, as well as to
the usang. They refer to them in the following manner. They assert that the bird called tictic is
the pander of the sorcerer called usang. Flying ahead of that being, the bird shows it the houses
where infants are to be born. That being takes its position on the roof of the neighboring house
and thence extends its tongue in the form of a thread, which it inserts through the anus of the
child and by that means sucks out its entrails and kills it. Sometimes they say that it appears in
the form of a dog, sometimes of a cat, sometimes of the cockroach which crawls under the mat,
and there accomplishes the abovesaid. In order to avoid that harm, they do certain of the above
things. To the patianac travelers also attribute their straying from or losing their road. In order to
keep the right path, they undress and expose their privies to the air, and by that observance they
say that they make sure of the right road; for then the patianac is afraid of them and cannot lead
them astray.
The bongsol they sometimes assert to be various durojones which are caused by the
sorcerer ganay, and which run all through the body of the bewitched, who generally remains
some moments as if dead or in a faint, and at other times as though mad or raving from the sight
of the ganay who appears to them in various shapes. In order to cure this sickness or
enchantment, they summon another sorcerer, and he after the incantations or efforts, which will
be told later, generally leaves the patient as he was before. Sometimes they say that that sickness
appears to be natural or a stomach ache caused by the obstructions or durojones which grow in
the stomach or in the patient’s side or by shivers which move from one place to another, and
from which the women of this country generally suffer. But when they are unable to cure the
pain with the promptness that they desire, they generally say, especially the physicians, that the
said sickness is bongsol, that is enchantment, and that it can be cured only by the one who is of
the faculty, that is by one who is a sorcerer. They then bring a sorcerer, who performs the things
that pertain to his faculty, and summons the first sorcerer who they say caused that sorcery. If the
sickness is not lessened, the sorcerer finishes his duty by saying that the said first witch is very
far away, and could not hear him; and consequently, it has happened that he has not been able to
cure the said sickness. In such wise do they leave the sick person with his pains.
The ceremony or superstition of bilao is ordered for the discovery thereby of any thief. It
is reduced to placing in a bilao, sieve, or screen, some scissors fastened at the point in the shape
of the cross of St. Andrew, and in them they hang their rosary. Then they repeat the name of each
one of those who are present and who are assembled for this. If, for example, when the name
48
Pedro is mentioned, the bilao shakes, they say that Pedro is the thief. They also are accustomed
to light candles to St. Anthony of Padua for the purpose of discovering the thief of anything [that
is stolen]. For this they kneel down to pray (and perhaps to utter and perform indecent things)
and wait until the flame leans toward any of those about, for instance, toward Juan, and then they
declare that Juan is the thief. It is very usual for the Indians to carry about them various things in
order that they might obtain marvelous effects: for example, written formulas, prayers, vitiated or
interspersed with words arranged for their evil intent, herbs, roots, bark, hairs, skin, bones,
stones, etc., so that they may not be killed, or apprehended by justice, or to obtain wealth,
women, or other things.4 They are also very much inclined to believe in omens and in unlucky
days, in regard to which they are wont to keep various books of manuscripts which must be
burned for them.
The natives are accustomed to circumcise the boys; and although they perform the
circumcision by slitting the skin of the penis lengthwise, instead of around, still it appears that
that may be accounted for by the fact that it is inferred that that ceremony was introduced into
Philipinas, by the Moros from Borneo, Mindanao, or Holo, as was also the word biñag, which is
used for “baptize,” and to mean “Christian,” and the word simba, which appears to mean
“adoration” among them. From this use they transfer it to their temples and mosques, and the
Tagálogs took it not to mean “adoration,” but “church,” and afterward used it to mean “mass,”
which it never could mean. Not only do they circumcise the males but also the women, girls, or
dalagas, [an operation] which they call sonad. It is reduced to cutting the organ or opening it up
somewhat. However, some of them, and very reasonably, affirm that that ceremony in them in
itself in both males and females is rather the offspring of lust than that of Judaism. They are also
accustomed to measure or compare the weapons that they make, for ]example, measuring the
catan by spans and praying at the same time the “Our Father.” If the conclusion of the measuring
is reached at the same time or when they come to the word “forgive us” they say that they cannot
be punished, but that they may kill people, etc. It appears that the custom has been introduced
among women who have recently brought forth of not going to church until the fortieth or
sixtieth day as they say of the purification of their bodies. In that not only do they fail in the
precept to hear mass but they also perform a Mosaic ceremony.
The Indians are generally corrupted by many errors, and it would take a long time to
mention them. Consequently, the ministers will be very careful to uproot them, for although it
does not cause any great harm in some because of their ignorance and lack of intelligence, in
others they do cause great harm; for example, Angel catutubo, which literally signifies “that my
guardian angel was born with me or at the same time as I.” In order to avoid danger, one should
say, Angel taga tanor, and the same thing in other languages.
Finally, so many are the superstitions, omens, and errors, that are found among the
Indians that it would be very difficult or impossible to mention them all. The above have been
mentioned so that the father ministers may examine others by them. It is to be noted that there
49
are sectarians and preachers of various false sects among the Indians, especially in the distant
provinces, either because they had false sects formerly and have continued them, or because they
took them (and this is more likely) from the Joloans, Mindanaos, Sangleys, and other heathen
nations with whom they are accustomed to have intercourse.
When the moon is eclipsed, the Indians of various districts generally go out into the street
or into the open fields, with bells, panastanes, etc. They strike them with great force and
violence in order that they might thereby protect the moon which they say is being eaten or
swallowed by the dragon, tiger, or crocodile. And the worst thing is that if they wish to say “the
eclipse of the moon” it is very common in Philipinas to use this locution, saying “the dragon,
tiger, or crocodile is swallowing the moon.” The Tagálogs also make use of it and say, Linamon
laho bovan. It appears that the Indians learned all this from the Sangleys of China, where all the
abovesaid is performed and executed to the letter. It is not right to allow them to retain these
deceits of the Chinese, and not to teach them our customs and truths. All the above contents of
this section is not universal in all parts. Consequently, although all ministers ought to be careful
to ascertain whether they are or are not contained in their ministries, they ought not to go ahead
to censure what they are not sure of, for that very thing would perhaps teach them what we are
endeavoring to extirpate.
50
Conspiracy Against the Spaniards (1588)
The following is an excerpt of the document signed by the notary public for King Philip II
stationed in the Royal Audiencia summarizing the events commonly designated as the
“Tondo Conspiracy.” The document accounts the events wherein the Datus of Tondo led by
Agustin de Legazpi, Martin Panga, Magat Salamat and several others conspired to fight off
the Spaniards occupying their territories. The conspiracy would be the first major rebellion
of the Tagalog area against the colonizers. The conspiracy was thwarted when Antonio
Surabao revealed the plans to the Spaniards. This led to the execution of the leaders and
the exile of many others who were involved. The Spaniards in response to the event would
ease down their policies when it comes to the Principales who would then receive benefits
and privileges from the administration.
Excerpt:
In fulfilment of the command and decree of Doctor Santiago de Vera, governor and
captain-general of these islands, and president of the royal Audiencia, I, Estevan de Marquina,
notary-public for the king our sovereign, of the number [authorized] in the city of Manila, testify
that a trial and criminal process has been conducted and is still pending before the said governor
and captain-general. The parties are the royal department of justice of the one part, and certain
Indian chiefs, natives of the villages of Tondo, Misilo, Bulacan, and other villages in the
neighborhood of Manila, of the other part. The cause of this contention seems to be that on the
twenty-sixth of October of last year, one thousand five hundred and eighty-eight, Doctor
Santiago de Vera, governor and captain-general of these islands, and president of the royal
Audiencia, learned that the following persons: Don Agustin de Legaspi, one of the chiefs of this
land; Martin Panga, governor of the village of Tondo, and his first cousin; Magat Salamat, the
son of the old lord of this land; and other chiefs, had not long ago sent a present of weapons and
other articles to the king of Burney, and that they were quite intent upon holding meetings and
their usual drunken feasts, swearing to keep secret whatever they discussed. He also learned that
they had sold and were selling their landed property. In order to ascertain what the condition of
affairs is, the governor made an inquiry and many witnesses were summoned. From this inquiry
and other investigations and inquests made in the course of the trials, it appears that the said Don
Agustin de Legaspi and Magat Salamat had sent a quantity of shields, arquebuses, and other
weapons to Xapon and to the petty king of Burney, who has thus been enabled to put himself on
a war-footing. They warned these powers to fortify themselves in their strongholds, because the
Spaniards intended to go there. They added that the said Don Agustin would notify them in
person of what was taking place; and that, for this purpose, he would ask permission to set out on
his commercial enterprises. Likewise, we learned that the people of the kingdom of Burney were
thinking of manning a fleet for the purpose of attacking the Spaniards; and that they had killed a
Franciscan friar and other Spaniards while on their way to Malaca from Manila with messages
and despatches for the king, our sovereign. It appears that on the fourth of November of the said
year, when the inquiry had not gone further than this, Captain Pedro Sarmiento arrived in this
51
city from the Calamianes, which are islands near Burney; and brought the news and information
that he had left behind in the said Calamianes three Indian chiefs of Tondo, namely, Magat
Salamat, Don Agustin Manuguit, son of Don Phelipe Salalila, and Don Joan Banal, brother-in law
of the said Magat. Through Don Antonio Surabao, his servant and chief of his encomienda, he
had learned that these men were going as ambassadors to the petty king of Burney, in order to
induce him to send a fleet to attack the Spaniards, and to join the chiefs of Jolo, and Sumaelob,
chief of Cuyo, who had already come to terms and offered to help them with two thousand men.
They had persuaded the said Don Antonio Surabao to accompany them and carry out their plans;
but the latter while on the one hand he promised to help them, in order not to arouse their
suspicion, on the other hand unfolded the plan to Captain Sarmiento. He added, moreover, that
Amarlangagui, chief of Baibai, who was within the jurisdiction of Manila and held the office of
master-of-artillery, had told him, while in this city, that all the chiefs of this neighborhood had
plotted and conspired with the Borneans to rebel against the service of the king our sovereign,
and to kill the Spaniards of this city, while they were off their guard. The plan was that when the
fleet of Burney reached the port of Cavite, and the Spaniards trustfully called these chiefs to their
aid, they would all immediately enter the houses of the Spaniards with their men, fortify
themselves in them and thus take possession of them one by one. If the Spaniards took refuge in
the fortress, Indian soldiers would follow them; and, being two to one, they would surely kill the
Spaniards. Maluco offered an example of this; for with but few people they had taken so large a
fortress from the Portuguese. To this end the people of Burney were building seven galleys and
other warships, and were getting ready ammunition and war-material. Thus, it is affirmed by the
said Don Antonio Surabao himself, who says that, under the pledge of friendship and secrecy, he
was made acquainted with all this, and was persuaded to join the said conspiracy. Upon this, with
the governor's approval, soldiers and attendants were immediately despatched with his orders to
arrest the said chiefs, and to bring them to this city as quickly as possible. From the inquiry and
secret investigations which were taken up anew, it appears that last year, five hundred and
eighty-seven, when Captain Don Joan Gayo and many Japanese with merchandise arrived at this
city in a ship from Xapon, Don Agustin de Legaspi became very friendly to him, inviting him
many times to eat and drink at his house which is on the other side of the river of this city. The
agreement and stipulation which he made with Don Joan Gayo through the Japanese interpreter,
Dionisio Fernandez, and in the presence of the said Magat Salamat, Don Agustin Manuguit, Don
Phelipe Salalila, his father, and Don Geronimo Bassi, Don Agustin de Legaspi's brother, was,
that the said captain should come to this city with soldiers from Xapon, and enter it under pretext
of peace and commerce, bringing in his ship flags for the use of the Spaniards, so that the latter
should think his intentions peaceful. It was also agreed that the chiefs of the neighborhood would
help them to kill the Spaniards, and would supply the provisions and everything necessary. The
said Don Agustin de Legaspi was to set out to meet them; and, in order that they might recognize
one another, he would carry some of the weapons which the said captain had given him. After
they had conquered the Spaniards, they would make him [Don Agustin] king of the land, and
collect the tribute from the natives, which would be divided between Don Agustin and the
Japanese. They swore this after their fashion, by anointing their necks with a broken egg. Don
Agustin de Legaspi discussed and arranged the whole plan with Amaghicon, an Indian chief of
Navotas, warned him to keep the secret, and gave him some of the weapons which the Japanese
52
had given him, in order that they might recognize oneanother. According to the declarations of
Dionisio Fernandez, the Japanese interpreter, Don Phelipe Salalila, Don Geronimo Basi, Magat
Salamat, and other witnesses who were present at the said meetings and compacts, and as it
appears also from the trial and investigations, it seems that when Don Martin Panga, under the
charge of adultery, Don Agustin de Legaspi, for accounts demanded of him at the time when he
was governor of Tondo, Don Gabriel Tuambaçan, Don Francisco Acta, his son, and Pitongatan
were taken to the prison of this court, each and every one of them swore, after their fashion, to
help one another with their persons and property in all matters--be it concerning the liberty of
their slaves, or in any other difficulty. Likewise, it appears that after they left the said prison, the
said Don Martin Panga was exiled from the village of Tondo for a certain period, and went to
live in the village of Tambobo, not far from this city. There he and Don Agustin de Legaspi
invited the other leaders to come together for a secret meeting. Under pretext of visiting said Don
Martin Panga, a meeting was held in the said village by Don Phelipe Salalila, Don Agustin
Manuguit; Magat Salamat, chief of Tondo; Don Pedro Bolingui, chief of Pandaca; Don
Geronimo Basi and Don Grabiel Tuam Basar, Don Agustin's brothers; Don Luis Amanicalao and
Calao his son; the brothers Don Dionisio Capolo and Don Phelipe Salonga; Don Phelipe
Amarlangagui, chief of Catangalan; Don Francisco Acta and Amaghicon; with other Indian
timaguas, servants, and allies of his. For three days they met, and drank after their fashion.
During this time, they resolved to act in harmony and with one mind in everything. If their slaves
demanded liberty, they were to help one another against them; for already they were not regarded
or obeyed as before. They possessed neither slaves nor gold, and found themselves poor and cast
down, ready to go to prison any day. Their sorrow was very keen because their wives were being
taken away from them, and given to others to whom, they claimed, they had been first married.
For all these reasons they were very sad, and they discussed and plotted, and took oath,
according to their custom, that if an enemy came to Manila to attack the Spaniards, they would
unanimously and with one mind aid the enemy against the Spaniards. Thus, they would once
more become masters, as they had been before, and exercise the old tyranny over the common
people--who now were much favored by the Spaniards, being promoted to superior places by
them. The said Don Agustin de Legaspi proposed to them the plan and compact which he had
made with the said Japanese Don Joan Payo [Gayo]; and the other chiefs declared that they were
ready to help him and to accede to his wishes. After this, it appears that in the month of February,
one thousand five hundred and eighty-eight, when we heard of the English pirate who passed
through these islands and plundered the ship "Santana," the said chiefs made preparations,
thinking he would come to this city, to carry out their plan.
