537
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
OF
HIS EXCELLENCY BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
[June 30, 2010, Quirino Grandstand, Rizal Park, Manila]
The inaugural address is retrieved from https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/about/
gov/exec/bsaiii/platform-of-government/
The political career of Benigno Simeon Aquino III, popularly known as Noynoy,
began in 1998 when he won the congressional seat, serving as Representative of
the 2nd district of Tarlac for the constitutionally mandated term limit of three
consecutive terms until 2007. Aquino secured a Senate seat in the May 2007
elections under the Genuine Opposition party. Launching his presidential bid in
2009, he joined the 2010 presidential race and won the presidency in the first fully
automated elections in the country.
At the outset, President Aquino, in his Platform of Government, recognized the
compelling need for a “national leadership in need of transformational change.
Aquino hastened to say that his parents’ (Ninoy’s and Cory’s) “legacy of change”
heralded “renewed hope.” He envisioned a country founded on “re-awakened
sense of right and wrong” and “strong solidarity of our society and its
communities” and fueled by an “organized and widely-shared rapid expansion of
our economy.” Adhering to “transformational leadership,” President Aquino
affirmed his commitment to combat corruption, alleviate poverty, prioritize
education, safeguard public health and equitably dispense justice.
A Social Contract with the Filipino People
BENIGNO S. AQUINO III
PLATFORM OF GOVERNMENT
A NATIONAL LEADERSHIP IN NEED OF TRANSFORMATIONAL
CHANGE Its legitimacy is under question;
It persecutes those who expose the truth about its illegitimacy and
corruption; It stays in power by corrupting individuals and institutions;
It confuses the people with half-truths and outright lies;
It rewards, rather than punishes, wrongdoing;
It offers no lasting solutions for the many problems of the country;
It weakens the democratic institutions that hold our leaders accountable.
It hinders our local governments from delivering basic services;
It has no vision of governance beyond political survival and self-enrichment.
538
A PEOPLE CRYING OUT FOR CHANGE
Corruption robs our children of their protection, nutrition and education.
Corruption destroys our families and communities.
Corruption steals from our farmers and workers.
Corruption deters businessmen from investing in our economy.
This has eroded our spirit as individuals, as communities, as a people.
We have lost trust in the democratic institutions we so courageously re-established after the
dictatorship.
Our proven capacity for collective outrage and righteous resistance has been weakened. We have
ceased to depend on the patriotism and civic engagement that used to animate many of our
efforts.
We have become divided and alienated, focusing only on ourselves and on our individual
pursuits.
Our moral faculties as a people have been paralyzed.
We have retreated into a dark world of self-absorption and cynicism. Our collective despair has
reached its lowest point.
THEN FINALLY, THE GIFT OF LIGHT
Cory Aquino passed on to the next life. From our sadness, we awakened to a shaft of light cutting
through the darkness. She left the Filipinos a legacy of selfless love for country and people.
Filipinos’ connection with each other was rekindled. In death, she enabled us to hope again for
decent government. The millions who connected with Cory at her funeral represented something
more than euphoria, sentiment or transient emotions. They represented the reverent memory of a
good leader in the past and the firm hope of having a similarly good leader in the future.
A PEOPLE’S CAMPAIGN OF RENEWED HOPE…
Anchored on Ninoy’s and Cory’s legacy of change through the ways of democracy Embraces the
qualities of integrity, humility and trustworthiness in public leadership Recognizes the absence of
these qualities in government as a major cause of widespread poverty, misery and despair.
THE VISION FOR THE PHILIPPINES:
A COUNTRY WITH…
1. A re-awakened sense of right and wrong, through the living examples of our highest leaders;
2. An organized and widely-shared rapid expansion of our economy through a government
dedicated to honing and mobilizing our people’s skills and energies as well as the responsible
harnessing of our natural resources;
3. A collective belief that doing the right thing does not only make sense morally, but translates
into economic value as well;
539
4. Public institutions rebuilt on the strong solidarity of our society and its communities.
OUR MISSION:
We will start to make these changes first in ourselves—by doing the right things, by giving value
to excellence and integrity and rejecting mediocrity and dishonesty, and by giving priority to
others over ourselves.
We will make these changes across many aspects of our national life.
A COMMITMENT TO TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP:
1. From a President who tolerates corruption to a President who is the nation’s first and most
determined fighter of corruption.
2. From a government that merely conjures economic growth statistics that our people know to
be unreal to a government that prioritizes jobs that empower the people and provide them with
opportunities to rise above poverty.
3. From relegating education to just one of many concerns to making education the central
strategy for investing in our people, reducing poverty and building national competitiveness.
4. From treating health as just another area for political patronage to recognizing the
advancement and protection of public health, which includes responsible parenthood, as key
measures of good governance.
5. From justice that money and connections can buy to a truly impartial system of institutions
that deliver equal justice to rich or poor.
ECONOMY
6. From government policies influenced by well-connected private interests to a leadership that
executes all the laws of the land with impartiality and decisiveness.
7. From treating the rural economy as just a source of problems to recognizing farms and rural
enterprises as vital to achieving food security and more equitable economic growth, worthy of
re-investment for sustained productivity.
8. From government anti-poverty programs that instill a dole-out mentality ® to well-considered
programs that build capacity and create opportunity among the poor and the marginalized in the
country.
540
9. From a government that dampens private initiative and enterprise to a government that creates
conditions conducive to the growth and competitiveness of private businesses, big, medium and
small.
10. From a government that treats its people as an export commodity and a means to earn foreign
exchange, disregarding the social cost to Filipino families to a government that creates jobs at
home, so that working abroad will be a choice rather than a necessity; and when its citizens do
choose to become OFWs, their welfare and protection will still be the government’s priority.
GOVERNMENT SERVICE
11. From Presidential appointees chosen mainly out of political accommodation to discerning
selection based on integrity, competence and performance in serving the public good.
12. From demoralized but dedicated civil servants, military and police personnel destined for
failure and frustration due to inadequate operational support to professional, motivated and
energized bureaucracies with adequate means to perform their public service missions.
GENDER EQUALITY
13. From a lack of concern for gender disparities and shortfalls, to the promotion of equal gender
opportunity in all spheres of public policies and programs.
PEACE & ORDER
14. From a disjointed, short-sighted Mindanao policy that merely reacts to events and incidents
to one that seeks a broadly supported just peace and will redress decades of neglect of the Moro
and other peoples of Mindanao.
ENVIRONMENT
15. From allowing environmental blight to spoil our cities, where both the rich and the poor bear
with congestion and urban decay to planning alternative, inclusive urban developments where
people of varying income levels are integrated in productive, healthy and safe communities.
16. From a government obsessed with exploiting the country for immediate gains to the
detriment of its environment to a government that will encourage sustainable use of resources to
benefit the present and future generations.
This platform is a commitment to change that Filipinos can depend on.
With trust in their leaders, everyone can work and build a greater future together.
541
Message
of
His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos
President of the Philippines
To the Congress
On the State of the Nation
[Delivered at the Batasang Pambansa, Quezon City, on July 26, 1993]
This document is accessible at https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1993/07/26/
fidel-v-ramos-second-state-of-the-nation-address-july-26-1993/.
Fidel V. Ramos, commonly known as FVR or Eddie, played a pivotal role in the
bloodless and non-violent People Power Revolution of 1986 that overthrew the
authoritarian regime of Ferdinand Marcos. When Corazon Aquino clinched the
presidency, Aquino named Ramos as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and later as Secretary of National Defense. Supported by President
Aquino, Ramos was catapulted to power, defeating Agrarian Reform Secretary,
Miriam Defensor Santiago, by a narrow margin.
President Ramos delivered his second State of the Nation Address (SONA) on
July 26, 1993. Ramos opened his address by challenging the honorable members
of the Congress “to seize the decisive moment.” He then proceeded to propound
and discuss his vision for the country under the catchphrase “Philippines 2000.”
Ramos envisaged that the country had evolved into a Newly Industrialized
Country (NIC) by the year 2000.
“Let’s Seize the Moment!”
Mr. Senate President; Mr. Speaker of the House; ladies and gentlemen of Congress; Your
Excellencies; special guests; mahal na kababayan:
Noong isang taon, ang ating mga kababayan ay naghahangad ng panibagong pagsisimula.
Ngayon, tapatan nating masasabi na nabigyan natin ang ating bansa ng bagong pag-asa.
A year ago, our people asked of us a new beginning.
Today, we can truly claim we have given our country that fresh start.
542
We have arrested the decline—of the economy and the national spirit—which had so
demoralized our people.
We are concluding a just and honorable peace with the military rebels, the insurgents, and the
southern secessionists.
A new spirit of cooperation existing between Congress and the presidency has avoided the
gridlock which obstructed policy making in previous administrations. And this is as it should be.
Executive and legislature are not meant to function in confrontation with each other.
Our investors and businessmen can almost take political stability for granted once again. The
stock market index has reached a record high.
Window of Opportunity
It is true that in some of our concerns—as in the economy—the forward movement has barely
begun. There is still so much to be done. But today I can report to you of a country and people
renewed in purpose.
Analyzing our situation in April, the World Bank noted:
The Philippines now faces its best prospect for sustained development in almost two decades. A
window of opportunity exists for the new government.
This optimism about our prospects is not unusual. It is shared by many—here and abroad. But “a
window of opportunity” is only that. A momentary opening—which can close sooner than we
expect.
Ladies and gentlemen of Congress:
I invite you to join me in taking advantage of this opportunity and to seize the decisive moment
together.
This is the challenge to leadership. Everywhere the old politics is in disfavor—because it has
failed to respond to the transformations taking place in the world.
We must learn new ways of looking at the world. We need new answers to our problems. In this
spirit, we offer a strategic framework for Philippine development.
The Strategic Framework: “Philippines 2000”
Modernization in our time requires the guidance and direction of a stable and resolute
government.
543
Compare the Philippine State with the East Asian dragons. The East Asian States are able to
assert their countries’ strategic interests because they are relatively free from the influence of
pressure groups. The Philippine State, in the past, had been unable to act consistently in the
national interest because it could not resist the importunings of oligarchic groups. And the
economy had been governed largely by politics instead of markets.
Because of this experience, we now know that development cannot take place in our country
unless we put our house in order. And this—to me—means accomplishing three things: One,
restoring political and civic stability. Two, opening the economy: dismantling monopolies and
cartels injurious to the public interest, and leveling the playing field of enterprise. Three,
addressing the problem of corruption and criminality.
These three tasks—once completed—shall secure the environment for self-sustaining growth—
and enable the government to positively and consistently act in the national interest.
Our strategic framework to establish effective government—of putting our house in order—so
that our drive for development can begin—we call “Philippines 2000.”
“Philippines 2000” has two components.
The first is the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 1993-1998 [MTPDP 93-98].
Guided by the principles of people empowerment and global excellence, it proposes specific
policies and programs to stimulate economic activity and mobilize the entrepreneurial spirit in
ordinary Filipinos. I strongly urge your approval of this medium-term Philippine development
plan.
The second component of “Philippines 2000” addresses the larger environment—the political,
social, and cultural climate—in which economic growth must take place.
The crucial question is: Can we reform an undemocratic economy by using a democratic political
framework?
Authoritarianism eased the way to economic power and higher living standards for our East
Asian neighbors. In contrast, we are working to reconcile our democratic politics with an
oligarchic economy left over from the colonial period—not by changing the political system, but
by democratizing the economy.
The time for authoritarianism has passed—in our country and in the world. Instead of the
discipline of command, we must invoke the self-discipline of civic responsibility.
We Filipinos have always accepted that people with more are obliged to help people with less—
in the name of a common, compassionate humanity. This traditional moral code we shall make a
principle of public policy.
544
The few who have can never be secure in their possessions for as long as they live among so
many who have not. Let me now take up our most urgent sectoral concerns one by one.
A. POLITICAL STABILITY AND PEACE AND ORDER
1. Stability and Civic Order
Examples from East Asia teach us that the first—and foremost—requirement of economic
development is stability, which is the long-term predictability of the social system. This is why
we are seeking a comprehensive and lasting peace. As proposed by the National Unification
Commission, we will pursue the “paths to peace” by undertaking social, economic, and political
reforms that address the root causes of armed conflict; by encouraging people to participate in
the peace process; by working for a negotiated settlement with the armed groups; and by
establishing programs for the reintegration of rebel groups into the mainstream of society
through a general amnesty program. At the same time, let us effect the modernization of our
Armed Forces. The cooling down of tensions in the region enables us to set new priorities in
defense spending.
2. Peace and Order
Peace and order are the other face of national stability. If we are to release the full energies of the
nation, people who live, work, and produce must be secure in their persons, in their property, and
in their homes. We have enhanced our institutional capability to cope with crime—through the
overhaul of the command-and-leadership structure of the Philippine National Police. To this end,
I propose that the PNP law (R.A. 6975) be amended to correct its many weaknesses. We will
dismantle the private armies that remain. We will not allow any more criminal brotherhoods, as
in Calauan, to exist. This includes purging local police forces of scalawags and bullies. Last year,
I proposed we restore the death penalty. I ask you to enact that measure as soon as possible. We
must show determination to prevent any reversions to barbarism. In particular, I see the merit of
bringing the anti-crime effort to the level of the barangay and the neighborhood—by evolving
new forms of collaboration between citizens and law enforcers. This way, we can steadily
constrict the space where crime can operate. The challenge is clear: Crime can only come under
full control when criminals—in or out of government—know we’re going to catch them, convict
them, and jail them.
B. THE ECONOMY
Opening the economy is, likewise, a political task. In order to level the field of competition, we
need to dismantle the structure of protectionism and controls, and restructure the monopolies and
cartels that operate against public interest. On the other hand, we must encourage and support
Filipino and Philippine-based corporations that have proven their efficiency, competitiveness,
and civic consciousness. the critical question is no longer whether we will grow. It is how we can
545
sustain and speed up this process. We have experienced a full year of steady, although
unspectacular, growth. In the first three quarters of this administration, our GNP in real terms
increased by an average of 1.3%. This is indeed modest—compared to the galloping growth of
our neighbors. But this is no mean achievement, given our crippling power crisis. You gave me
powers to break some of the barriers to the construction of generating plants that prolonged the
crisis. We, in turn, ploughed through the maze of regulations and opened the gate.
Today, new plants are operating and others are under construction. The economy will soon have
the power needed for growth. The power crisis is on its way to resolution because of the united
actions of Congress and the executive branch. This is where our strength lies, in unity of purpose
and harmony of actions. But these alone will not be sufficient for the economy to be strong and
resilient for global competition. We therefore also have introduced reforms to restructure the
system in favor of efficiency away from protecting the inefficient. We will continue policies of
sound monetary management and containment of public sector deficits to ensure that private
sector enterprise will invest, expand production, generate employment, and realize fair returns,
particularly for exporters. As the power crisis eases, and as we carry out structural reforms, the
economy should accelerate. The indicators are increasingly hopeful, such as:
• •
Inflation went down to 6.7% and interest rates declined to 10.2% in June.
The foreign exchange rate is at a level that spurs exports.
• •
Gross international reserves were at an all-time high of US$6.7 billion early this year.
Investments registered with the Board of Investments grew by 111% in the first semester
compared to the first semester of 1992.
But against these, we must admit these undeniable shortcomings:
•
Revenues of the national government have fallen short of our goals.
•
Expenditures in public investments fell short of programmed levels.
•
Unemployment and underemployment have been reduced only minimally.
1. The Test of Reforms
What must we do so reforms will result in a robust and expanded economy? First and foremost,
we must not relent in our campaign to level the field of business competition: Global
competitiveness must begin at home. Government will not retreat in its campaign against
injurious monopolies and tax evaders. And so, I ask for the urgent passage of anti-trust and anti
racketeering legislation.
Let us recognize that an economy controlled by rent-seekers cannot produce free competition
and efficiency. The economy must be open to all who bring in new capital, new knowledge, new
ideas, and new levels of efficiency. We must broaden the base of economic participation. Let us,
therefore, make this Ninth Congress the instrument to free and democratize our economy. By all
means, let us join hands in an economic summit—the sooner, the better.
546
2. The Financial System
The independent Central Monetary Authority assures us of a new regime of price stability.
Opening of the financial system to foreign banks should bring more foreign investment and
expertise. We have substantially recovered from the balance-of-payments crisis in the mid
eighties. The 1992 commercial bank restructuring package largely put to rest our problem on
commercial debt. This year, we reentered the international capital market. Our two bond issues
have been oversubscribed—confirming our credit-worthiness and international confidence in our
future. But we must be prudent in availing of such credits. Instead, we should turn more to
grants, concessional credits, and long-term loans. These will help fund our development projects.
In response to recent reports on a supposed change in debt policy, let me state very clearly that it
is in our national interest to maintain our current policy. Let us not risk curtailment of credit
flows and cut the lifeline of business and commerce.
3. The Budget
I will soon submit to you, ladies and gentlemen of Congress, our proposed budget for 1994—
detailing how we intend to finance our development plan. Our spending plan clearly states our
priorities on how to do more with less. We will put the highest priority in those activities that pay
the most dividends in productivity and growth. And we must resist the usual temptation to spend
merely on what is popular just to win votes. The 1994 budgets should be approved by Congress
well before Christmas 1993, well before the lights go on again at that time.
4. Resource Mobilization
To meet the requirements of the development plan, we must mobilize resources through greater
revenue generation rather than excessive borrowings.
We have to increase revenues to cover current shortfalls and fund public expenditures.
Our tax base has been eroded by proliferation of exemptions, infirmities of tax laws, deficiencies
in collections, and widespread evasion. Tax exemptions, while well meant, are often abused by
the underserving. The revenues lost from the exemptions have escalated from P3.3 billion in
1986 to P25 billion in 1992—or two-thirds of the capital budget of the national government for
1993. This amount does not even include exemptions which have not been monitored.
So let us review existing exemption laws and replace them for those deserving beneficiaries with
direct budget support—so that the whole system will be transparent, accountable, and
manageable.
We also have to cure infirmities in tax laws—such as deductions for married couples with joint
incomes.
In your last session, this Congress passed laws to strengthen the enforcement powers of our
revenue agencies. For these I am truly grateful.
547
I have ordered both Commissioners of Internal Revenue and of Customs to use these powers to
go relentlessly after evaders, smugglers, and dishonest collectors.
I am convinced that citizens will faithfully comply with their tax obligations if there are no free
riders on their backs. But because of existing contractual obligations, the payoff from tax reforms
may not be sufficient to finance the needs of development. I therefore ask the support of
Congress for a new revenue package for urgent enactment. This will widen the tax base and
rationalize the existing structure.
Reforms in tax administration must aim to achieve simplicity, uniformity, and efficiency. This is
the best way to arrest the present epidemic of tax avoidance and evasion.
Growth cannot take place without some sacrifice from everyone of us. But let us agree that the
tax burden must fall heaviest on those who can best bear it.
But we must not tax at levels that will become a drag on the economy. Consequently, I also ask
your help to tap other public funds in special and trust accounts, such as those of the Philippine
Tourism Authority and the duty-free shop, and make these available for our budget program. The
law creating the Central Monetary Authority adds to the heavy demands on scarce fiscal
resources that cannot be entirely covered by additional tax revenues.
For our part, we will accelerate sales of public assets and shares in private corporations, and get
government out of the business of the private sector. I therefore ask you to extend the life of the
committee on privatization and the asset privatization trust, which otherwise will end this year.
I also urge Congress to set guidelines for the Presidential Commission on Good Government in
making compromise settlements on ill-gotten wealth cases—on terms fair to the government and
only with those who have demonstrated commitment to help in the development of our country.
My vision of a tax system is a broad-based one with just a few exemptions and at rates that yield
no premium to tax evasion, where all enterprises and citizens carry their equitable share.
5. Promoting Investment
Congress has acted quickly—and decisively—on the framework for investments.
We now have a real opportunity to secure a fair share of the investments flowing into the
ASEAN region. What is important is that we continue to improve our country’s attractiveness for
investments—by emphasizing our comparative advantage.
6. Industry
Manufacturing and other industrial activities can proceed with greater vigor as the power
situation improves in terms of competitiveness and productivity. We will champion exports as the
key to sustainable economic growth.
548
And we will redouble our efforts to disperse industries to the countryside with emphasis on the
small and medium enterprises.
The former military baselands—which were the cause of so much concern on the departure of
the U.S. military—have now become attractive sites for economic expansion.
Subic has become one of our brightest areas for foreign investment. Similarly, we have been able
to move substantially to transform Clark Air Base and Camp John Hay from calamity areas to
growth centers.
7. Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
We have identified key production areas [KPAs] for specific commodities—areas where not just
soil and climate but also markets are most suitable. For example, if we concentrated on growing
rice and corn only where they will best grow, with adequate irrigation we can produce as much
grain—as we have been producing on 5 million hectares—on only 2 million hectares.
We can then free some 3 million hectares now devoted to marginal rice and corn growing to
other uses—to pasture, to aquaculture, and to high-value crops. These efforts in agriculture must
be matched by equally resolute efforts at agrarian reform. This reform has been often pledged,
but only half-heartedly redeemed.
My administration has stepped up the pace of the CARP implementation. During this first year,
we have acquired, distributed and titled some 382,000 hectares, with nearly a quarter of a million
farmers benefited. This is 41% of all land titles distributed by the Department of Agrarian
Reform during the last 30 years.
But you and I know agrarian reform is more than just the redistribution of land. We have
therefore taken decisive steps also to ensure that the land remains productive for farmers. We
increased agricultural support services and livelihood assistance to CARP beneficiaries. We
encouraged them to organize cooperatives and to take advantage of economies of scale to
enhance their productivity.
Last year we launched 257 agrarian reform communities [ARCs] nationwide—with at least one
in each congressional district in the countryside—where farmer-beneficiaries can better feel the
impact of localized support services in terms of higher incomes.
Our goal is to have 1,000 of these ARCs of progress by 1998. This is not enough, however, for
the kind of rural transformation that we seek. We have to conserve agricultural lands. That is why
our tax package includes a land conversion tax.
549
8. Tourism
In tourism, we are beginning to reap dividends from our efforts to improve the country’s image
and develop “environment-friendly ecotourism.”
Tourist arrivals reached 1.15 million in 1992—up by nearly 200,000 compared to 1991. These
generated tourist receipts of some $1.7 billion, an increase of 30.6% over the previous year’s.
Tourism arrangements made with our ASEAN neighbors and new tourism estate development
will boost our earnings from this source.
9. Infrastructure Development and Energy
In infrastructure, we have requirements long neglected. Our network of roads, bridges, air and
sea ports is grossly overloaded and poorly maintained.
Since the funding for our infrastructure development needs is immense, I propose the
amendment of the Build-Operate-Transfer law to encourage greater participation from private
capital. Such participation must now be motivated by risk reward for efficiency and without the
guarantee of government.
In energy, the dark time is almost over. By year-end, we shall have added 900 megawatts to the
Luzon grid. This should—once and for all—put an end to the brownouts in households in Luzon.
By the second half of 1994, we shall have reliable power service for industry.
In the Visayas, power has been adequate, and projects are ongoing to be sure that no deficiency
occurs.
In Mindanao, the National Power Corporation has just announced the complete restoration of
power normalcy effective today.
In rural electrification, we have energized 94% of all our towns and cities, and 63% of our
barangays. But we should strive harder so that more of our countrymen shall have electricity.
There are bills in Congress which we support to strengthen the NEA to enable it to carry out its
mission better.
We continue to develop geothermal energy—a competitively priced, indigenous, and
environment-friendly option. PNOC’s additional plants between now and 1998 will increase
baseload geothermal capacity by 150%. More geothermal resources must be found. We therefore
urge Congress to enact the Geothermal Bill to encourage more exploration.
Our development program in power is indeed designed to provide comprehensively for our
industrial future.
550
C. ENVIRONMENT
In the past, many nations—ours included—tried to attain wealth by withdrawing from their
ecological capital. We are all now paying dearly to restore what we took out of our forests in the
past.
So while we still can, we must seek growth that does not exploit our country’s natural wealth.
Thus, we strongly uphold our commitment to the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21—which is the
global blueprint for sustainable development.
Over the past year, we banned logging in virgin forests, and restricted harvesting to second
growth timber. We continue to pursue a no-nonsense campaign against illegal loggers.
We strictly enforced the interim guidelines on land use conversion to preserve prime agricultural
land.
We initiated the use of low-lead and sulfur-free gasoline.
And we closed down Smokey Mountain while providing alternative livelihood options for its
residents.
Nevertheless, we need to provide an environmental protection outlook on old and new problems.
We are therefore submitting new codes covering mining, land management, forestry, and fishery.
In addition, we need laws to improve solid waste management and to set up a nationwide potable
water program for our communities.
D. THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT
1. The Bureaucracy
A bureaucracy that is mission-driven, and manned by a well-motivated and innovative
workforce, provides the foundation upon which we can pursue our goals vigorously. This is a
critical requirement for securing our environment for development—a civil service honest and
efficient to facilitate the workings of the free market.
One of my first moves was to issue Memorandum Order No. 27, ordering all departments and
agencies to eliminate duplication of functions, achieve greater cost-effectiveness, and rechannel
resources to priority projects.
But our efforts have been hampered by multiple barriers to change—which are, ironically,
engraved in the civil service law. Although it was not so intended, the civil service law
sometimes acts as a brake on efforts at reform.
551
It is time we addressed this issue together. Give me the authority to reorganize the bureaucracy—
and I assure you that we shall achieve the kind of organization required for efficient, effective,
and quality administration.
By the same token, let us recognize that an efficient bureaucracy depends on decently paid civil
servants. I ask Congress to amend our existing compensation laws—so that government can
begin to attract into and retain talent in the service—especially from among our best and
brightest.
2. Administration of Justice
I know you are as concerned as I am about our people’s perception of the judiciary. I have said it
before and I say it to you again. I have no doubt the majority of our judges are as honest,
hardworking, and dedicated as they have solemnly sworn to be. But we cannot permit the erosion
of people’s faith in the judiciary, which is the indispensable third pillar in our democratic system
of government.
The most urgent problem is how to deal with our clogged dockets, with over 300,000 undecided
cases in our Regional Trial Courts alone.
And so, instead of just blaming our judges for the delay, let us find practical ways of helping
them along. Thus, I urge the passage of laws which will relieve the Supreme Court of the burden
of reviewing decisions of certain administrative agencies. Likewise, the jurisdiction of the
municipal trial courts can be broadened. And we should also strengthen the barangay justice
system and pass the Legal Education Reform bill and the proposal for an academy for judges and
prosecutors.
The establishment of this academy is part of our program of professionalizing our prosecution
service. One must now pass a qualifying examination as part of the requirements for entry into
the national prosecution service. The performance of our prosecutors’ field offices is now
monitored and evaluated on a quarterly basis.
For a more focused rehabilitation of our prisoners, we are now reviewing a program to
regionalize our prison system, which will also free a vast and valuable asset in Muntinlupa.
3. Local Government
The improvement of administration at national level must be matched by a similar advance in
local government administration.
The expectations are high in our local communities because more resources, powers and
responsibilities have been devolved to local governments. But the objectives of the Local
Government Code of 1991 will be realized only with the proper use of these powers by local
authorities.
552
We need to correct the law so that the mismatches in internal revenue allocations and the cost of
devolved functions, which have disadvantaged some local government units, will be solved.
Effective governance will depend on the harmony of actions between national and local
governments as well as among local governments themselves. Inconsistencies in their respective
areas will disrupt day to day affairs of commerce and economic life. Devolved powers have to be
exercised judiciously without conflict with national policies. And the use of resources has to be
subject to the same discipline of prudence and accountability. The national government will
extend assistance in enhancing the management capabilities of local authorities.
E. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Development is impossible if it is not people-powered and people-centered. Whenever foreign
observers look at our country, their principal wonder is how we have managed to languish in
underdevelopment in spite of our tremendous human resources, especially our labor force—their
literacy, their competence, their resourcefulness, their high sense of moral values.
It is time we fully harnessed this precious asset to bring about greater productivity and social
cohesion.
1. Population Policy
We have embarked on a clear population policy that recognizes the need to moderate our
population growth rate. At 2.3%, it is the highest in our part of the world. This rate of growth
impairs our capability to improve our quality of life. It strains both our natural environment and
our resources for providing jobs, education, housing, health, and other social services.
Government has committed itself squarely to a family planning program based on choice—and
with the goal of bringing down the growth rate to under 2% by 1998.
For this, education and advocacy are our principal tools. And we look to partnership with the
private sector and nongovernment organizations in reaching out to our people.
We must achieve an appropriate growth and distribution of our population consistent with
sustainable development. We must reduce—and eventually reverse—migration into cities and
uplands and thereby check the congestion in our major urban centers and environmental
degradation in our uplands.
2. Education
Ensuring full and unimpeded access by all to both primary and secondary schools is the most
effective way of empowering ordinary people.
553
Education reform must also develop a curriculum strong in science, mathematics, and languages.
It must include the enhancement of the conditions of teachers—in both their livelihood and their
work.
Vocational education and technical training should keep to their basic purpose, which is to
prepare young people for worthwhile jobs, and to teach new technologies that our economy
needs.
College- and university-level education should focus on developing competent professionals and
on nurturing a culture of scientific excellence.
We will expand the public school network to the rural barangays which are still without public
elementary schools, and all municipalities still without any high school, public or private.
All these require fundamental reorientation of our values and a continuing review of our
education and training policies.
3. Health Care
Of all government public services, we have reason to be proud of our National Health Care
Program. For several years now, health care stood high in our people’s esteem because service
delivery is sustained and dedicated. We have moved to improve these services further.
In particular, government has implemented new policies and programs to increase life
expectancy by extensive immunization, improved nutrition, and environmental sanitation.
4. Housing
We look at the housing problem not only as an opportunity to propel economic activity but more
as a challenge to alleviate the sad plight of our people in our slum dwellings.
The challenge is to ensure continued investments in low-cost housing through stable financing
and by devising new and imaginative arrangements that will maximize the private sector’s role.
I will certify to Congress a bill that makes contributions to Pag-IBIG mandatory beyond a certain
salary ceiling and taps other sources for socialized housing. This will help raise funds for the
housing effort.
F. FOREIGN RELATIONS
In foreign relations, we too, are striking out in new directions.
The visits I have been making to our neighbors are meant to signal the priority we are giving to
ASEAN and the larger Asia-Pacific region.
554
With the United States, we are entering a new era based on partnership and cooperation—while
further strengthening our relationships with Europe and the countries of the Middle East.
Now more than ever, we must place our diplomacy in the service of our economy and our
external security.
Our foreign missions have focused on attracting investments, developing export markets,
promoting tourism; gathering economic information, and facilitating the inflow of development
aid.
In cooperation with our partners in ASEAN, we are promoting confidence-building measures
among the claimants to the disputed areas of the South China Sea. And we are taking part in our
cooperative arrangements to advance regional security.
In addition to our preferential trade arrangements, we in ASEAN have also come together to give
our six countries the economic weight, the cultural variety, the talent pool, the technological
resilience, and the attractiveness to investors that we need to become a major player in the world.
G. FIGHTING POVERTY
The central thrust of all our programs is the alleviation of poverty. We must fight poverty in ways
that will not merely wait for the economy to develop.
We must make sure that growth is broad-based and socially equitable—that growth leaves no
social group behind.
Particularly vulnerable are our marginalized sectors—subsistence farmers and agricultural
workers, marginal fishermen, cultural communities, the elderly, the disabled, the street children,
the urban underclass of unskilled workers, squatters, and their families.
The economy’s return to growth shall by itself help ease poverty. But we shall also be needing
focused, targeted, and specific safety nets for these vulnerable groups. We are therefore partial to
policies and programs that encourage community organizing to attain self-reliance for the poor
communities. And we will match their self-organizing initiatives with more social expenditures,
food and education subsidies, rural credit, and livelihood programs.
All of these we should do. We cannot leave our poor to wait for the benefits from economic
growth to trickle down to where they are.
Toward Self-Sustaining Growth
Ladies and gentlemen of Congress:
555
In closing, let me declare that I do believe we have started creating the conditions for self
sustaining growth. We can end once and for all, by our cooperative efforts, the cycles of boom
and bust which have characterized our economic performance.
But this much we must realize: reform will not come easy. Some reforms may bring difficult
adjustments and even hardships before they do any good. The most we can do is to ensure that
reforms hurt least our most vulnerable social groups.
The ultimate truth is that we cannot afford to fail—in our venture of reform and development.
The consequences of failure will be grave.
Radical insurgency should never flare up all over again: These last 18 years, it has already cost
us 40,000 dead.
The roots of Philippine rebellion lie deeply buried in the poverty, inequality, and injustice of our
social system; in the inefficiency, corruption, indifference, and arrogance of those in power.
Again and again, the violence of rebellion has broken out—in leftist insurgencies, military
mutinies, and separatist movements. We cannot keep using force and violence to suppress these
outbreaks. We must try to recognize their root causes so that we can apply lasting solutions. To
do that, we must understand how far rebels are motivated by people’s frustrations over their
inability to break through the barriers and patterns of oligarchic power that control their lives.
Only then can we redress, once and for all, the imbalance in national society between the few
who are rich and the many who are poor. Only then can we make economic growth meaningful
to the masses of our people.
We are at a critical hour in our life as a nation. Depending on how we act, our country shall
either prosper or falter. Depending on how well we match our words with deeds, our nation shall
enter into its second century dragged down by crisis and factionalism—or raised by achievement
and pride.
Our history teaches us that the exercise of power must be guided by principle. For power
exercised without principle is ruthless, and principle without the exercise of power cannot move
our nation forward.
Mga mahal na kababayan, sa tulong at gabay ng ating Panginoon, magsimula na tayong kumilos
upang harapin ang dakilang kapalaran na ating inaasam.
Invoking God’s blessings, let us move forward and fulfill our destiny.
Mabuhay ang “Philippines 2000!!!”
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas !!!
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat
556
Talumpati sa Pagtanggap ng Tungkulin
ng
Kagalang-galang Joseph Ejercito Estrada
Pangulo ng Pilipinas
[Inihayag sa Quirino Grandstand, Manila noong ika-30 ng June 1998]
The inaugural speech forms part of Manuel L. Quezon III, 20 Speeches that
Moved a Nation (Pasig City: Anvil Publishing, in cooperation with Platypus P u b
l i s h i n g , 2 0 0 2 ) , 9 8 - 1 0 1 a n d i s r e t r i e v e d f r o m https://
www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1998/06/30/inaugural-address-of-president-estrada
official-english-translation-june-30-1998/
Pursuing a movie career for over three decades, Joseph Marcelo Ejercito, Estrada,
the screen name Joseph “Erap” Estrada, was a popular Filipino actor who
typically portrayed the role of the champion of the masses. The actor made his
first foray into politics in the 1960s when he clinched the mayoralty in the
municipality of San Juan. After serving as Senator, he ascended to power as Vice
President. Running under the banner of “Erap para sa Mahirap” in May 1998
national elections, Estrada garnered the presidency by a large margin of votes.
The actor-politician faced impeachment proceedings on allegations of corruption.
His presidency was short-lived as he was toppled by the EDSA People Power II
Revolution in January 2001. In September 2007, the Sandiganbayan, the anti graft
court, imposed the penalty of reclusion perpetua upon Estrada on charges of
plunder. He was released from detention when President Gloria Macapagal
Arroyo granted him executive clemency on October 25, 2007.
President Joseph Estrada started his inaugural address by emphasizing that “the
day of the Filipino masses” had come after they had “waited long enough for their
turn and he was “finally leading them.” Identifying himself with the masses,
President Estrada vowed that the welfare of the masses must be his government’s
overriding priority. Estrada made a serious commitment to deliver basic services,
build roads, and eradicate crimes. The actor-politician vowed to prosecute graft
and corruption cases. In concluding his speech, he called upon the Filipino people
to make use of the people power “for the people themselves.”
557
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
OF
HIS EXCELLENCY JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA
[Delivered at the Quirino Grandstand, Manila on June 30, 1998]
Good afternoon.
The light is fading, the day is almost over, and yet this late afternoon is the morning of a new
day. The day of the Filipino masses. One of their own is finally leading them.
The last time I was here at the Quirino grandstand, I was with President Cory Aquino, Cardinal
Sin, and other religious leaders and fighters for democracy. We were here with many of you to
stand up and be counted as friends of the democracy. Ask yourselves then, how could anyone call
me a dictatorial type?
The last time I was there, in the old senate building, we were only Twelve
— Twelve against a superpower;
Twelve against a government under its thumb:
Twelve against public opinion:
But twelve for the sovereignty and honor of our country.
Ask yourselves who has principles.
Maybe I felt strongly about getting all the wrong priorities out of the way so we can focus on the
right things at once.
Maybe I felt that we cannot wait for time to heal our wounds and that we should help along the
healing process.
558
Who has been hurt and insulted than I? I have been hurt, and my mother even more deeply at
having to listen to all those insults against her son in tri-media. I am but human and I don’t want
to forgive. But I must. And I have. I must work with those who hurt me because we have only
one country between us. I must work with them and they must live with me, because every
Filipino is needed to meet the challenge of national survival in the regional crisis.
If I seemed impatient, it was only for peace. We must put yesterday behind us, so we can work
for a brighter tomorrow. I did not mean for us to forget the past. I don’t. But I hope we will not
let the past get in the way of a future that calls for cooperation to achieve peace and prosperity.
Finally, I felt that the common people have waited long enough for their turn, for their day to
come.
That day is here.
And it comes not a moment too soon on the centennial of the birth of Filipino freedom.
One hundred years after Kawit, fifty years after independence, twelve years after Edsa, and
seven years after the rejection of foreign bases, it is now the turn of the masses to experience
liberation.
We stand in the shadow of those who fought to make us free—free from foreign domination, free
from domestic tyranny, free from superpower dictation, free from economic backwardness. We
acknowledge a debt of gratitude to Jose Rizal, Andres Bonifacio, Emilio Aguinaldo, Manuel
Quezon, Ramon Magsaysay, Cory Aquino, Fidel Ramos, and the magnificent twelve of the 1991
senate who voted for Filipino sovereignty and honor.
These are the men and women who gave birth to the idea of Filipino freedom; who struggled in
war to give it recognition; and worked in peace to make it come true. Cory Aquino brought
freedom back after it was taken away and Fidel Ramos showed how power should respect the
people’s freedom of choice in elections.
They also began the slow and difficult work of making freedom more meaningful — not just for
the rich but also for the poor who are more but have nothing.
559
It is time. Time to speed up the improvement of the living conditions of the common people.
Time for them to have a fairer share of the national wealth they create and a bigger stake in their
own country.
Some will say we cannot rush these things. First, focus on the economy again. Of course, we
must improve the economy. How else can the people’s lives improve? But why not both
together? Why must economic progress always be at the people’s expense?
When it was a question of economic reforms to rebuild business confidence and restore business
profits, the reforms were never too fast or too hard, especially for the common people to bear.
Six years after Cory Aquino, the foundations of a strong economy were laid. In the six years of
the Ramos administration, the economy was paying big dividends to its biggest stockholders.
This time, why not to the common people as well, for a change? Must we always measure
progress only by the golf courses of the rich?
I hope this message will not be taken badly by the rich. It has always been their turn, and it is
also their turn again. For it is the priority of my administration to create the environment of peace
and order in which business does well. But, surely, it is time for the masses to enjoy first priority
in the programs of the government.
As far as resources permit, to the best of our ability and the limit of our energy, we will put a roof
over their heads, food on their tables and clothes on their backs. We will educate their children
and foster their health. We will bring peace and security, jobs and dignity to their lives. We will
put more infrastructure at their service, to multiply their productivity and raise their incomes.
But this time things will be different. What wealth will be generated will be more equitably
shared. What sacrifices are demanded will be more evenly carried. This much I promise, for
every stone of sacrifice you carry, I will carry twice the weight.
This I promise the people. You will not be alone again in making sacrifices, and you will not be
the last again to enjoy the rewards when they come.
I ask the rich to take a share of the sacrifices commensurate with their strength. What each of us
carries is not our individual burden alone, but the fate of our country that we must all share, and
which none of us can escape.
