70
Del Pilar, Marcelo H. 1888. La Frailocracia Filipina, trans. Leonor Agrava, 33-43. Manila:
National Historical Institute, 2009.
Marcelo H. del Pilar was born in Cupang, Bulacan on 30 August 1850 to Julian H. del Pilar
nd Blasa Gatmaitan. He first began schooling with a private tutor, Mr. Flores, and
proceeded to study at the University of Santo Tomas where he obtained his bachelor’s
degree and law degree.
Early on, he became involved in anti-friar activities. He founded the Diariong Tagalog on 1
June 1882. Later, he led anti-friar movements in Malolos. Because of the fear of reprisal for
his anti-friar activities, Del Pilar left the Philippines in 1889. He arrived in Spain and
continued writing in La Solidaridad. From 1890 until the end of the newspaper’s
publication, Del Pilar served as its editor.
The following work by Del Pilar, “La Frailocracia Filipina,” was first published in
Barcelona in 1889 and was written as a response to a pamphlet titled, “Los Frailes en
Filipinas.” In this work, Del Pilar criticized the power of the friars in the country and
called for radical reforms in the Philippines.
71
Del Pilar, Marcelo H. 1888. Aba Guinoong Baria. In Buhay at mga Sinulat ni Plaridad, ed.
Jose P. Santos, 14. Maynila: Palimbag ng DALAGA.
Marcelo H. del Pilar was born in Cupang, Bulacan on 30 August 1850 to Julian H. del Pilar
nd Blasa Gatmaitan. He first began schooling with a private tutor, Mr. Flores, and
proceeded to study at the University of Santo Tomas where he obtained his bachelor’s
degree and law degree.
Early on, he became involved in anti-friar activities. He founded the Diariong Tagalog on 1
June 1882. Later, he led anti-friar movements in Malolos. Because of the fear of reprisal for
his anti-friar activities, Del Pilar left the Philippines in 1889. He arrived in Spain and
continued writing in La Solidaridad. From 1890 until the end of the newspaper’s
publication, Del Pilar served as its editor.
The following work by Del Pilar, “Aba Guinoong Baria,” is a satire found in a collection
called Dasalan at Tocsohan, which was said to have been co-written by Pedro Serrano
Laktaw and Rafael Enriquez. The short poem, along with others like it in the collection,
illustrates the avariciousness of friars in the Philippines. It drives home the point Del Pilar
aimed to express: that the corruption of Philippine society can be blamed on the greed of
the friars.
Excerpt :
Aba Guinoong Baria
Aba guinoong Baria nacapupuno ca nang alcancia ang Fraile'I sumasainyo bucod ca niyang
pinagpala't pina higuit sa lahat, pinagpala naman ang caban mong ma-pasoc. Santa Baria Ina
nang Deretsos, ipanalangin mo caming huag anitan ngayon at cami ipapatay. Siya naua.
Ang Aba Po Santa Baria
Aba po Santa Bariang Hari, inagao nang Fraile, icao ang cabuhayan at catamisan. Aba bunga
nang aming pauis, icao ang pinagpaguran naming pinapanaw na tauong Anac ni Eva, icao nga
ang ipinagbubuntong hininga naming sa aming pagtangis dito sa bayang pinacahapishapis. Ay
aba pinacahanaphanap naming para sa aming manga anac, ilingon mo sa aming ang cara- i
cruz mo man lamang at saca bago matapos ang pagpanaw mo sa amin ay iparinig mo sa amin
ang iyong calasing Santa Baria ina nang deretsos, malacas at maalam, matunog na guinto cami
ipanalangin mong huag magpatuloy sa aming ang manga banta nang Fraile. Amen.
72
Edmund Plauchut. 1877. The Philippine Islands. In La Solidaridad, Vol. 2: 1890, trans.
Guadalupe Fores-Ganzon, 62-75. Pasig City: Fundación Santiago.
On the 20th year anniversary of the execution of the three priests, Jose Burgos, Mariano
Gomez, and Jacinto Zamora, the newspaper La Solidaridad published Edmund Plauchut’s
account of the execution. The first hand account by the Frenchman resident of Manila was
originally published in the French journal, Revue des Deux Mondes in 1877. Plauchut’s
account has often been called “the Filipino version” of the events that transpired in 1872.
The historian John N. Schumacher, however, found the account problematic, citing
inconsistencies in statements and the lack of knowledge on background events in the
Philippines. Schumacher also contended that it was not clear whether Plauchut was really
in the Philippines during the period of 1869 to 1873. This only led Schumacher to believe
that it was highly likely that the account written by Plauchut was itself inspired and aided
by at least one political prisoner, Antonio Regidor, who was imprisoned after the events of
1872. Therefore, while the “Filipino version” of the events of 1872 may contain biases
towards the Filipinos, it should be read in the context of early propaganda efforts. The
account published in La Solidaridad may indeed be “dramatic” according to Schumacher,
but the motives behind the writing of such an account contributes knowledge on the
workings of a propaganda efforts that preceded even Rizal’s generation.
Excerpt:
Late in the night of the 15th of February 1872, a Spanish court martial found three secular
priests, Jose Burgos, Mariano Gomez and Jacinto Zamora, guilty of treason as the instigators of a
mutiny in the Kabite navy-yard a month before, and sentenced them to death. The judgement of
the court martial was read to the priests in Fort Santiago early in the next morning and they were
told it would be executed the following day… Upon hearing the sentence, Burgos broke into
sobs, Zamora lost his mind and never recovered it, and only Gomez listened impassively, an old
man accustomed to the thought of death.
When dawn broke on the 17th of February there were almost forty thousand of Filipinos (who
came from as far as Bulakan, Pampanga, Kabite and Laguna) surrounding the four platforms
where the three priests and the man whose testimony had convicted them, a former artilleryman
called Saldua, would die.
The three priests followed Saldua: Burgos ‘weeping like a child’, Zamora with vacant eyes, and
Gomez head held high, blessing the Filipinos who knelt at his feet, heads bared and praying. He
was next to die. When his confessor, a Recollect friar , exhorted him loudly to accept his fate, he
replied: “Father, I know that not a leaf falls to the ground but by the will of God. Since He wills
that I should die here, His holy will be done.”
Zamora went up the scaffold without a word and delivered his body to the executioner; his mind
had already left it.
73
Burgos was the last, a refinement of cruelty that compelled him to watch the death of his
companions. He seated himself on the iron rest and then sprang up crying: “But what crime have
I committed? Is it possible that I should die like this. My God, is there no justice on earth?”
A dozen friars surrounded him and pressed him down again upon the seat of the garrote, pleading
with him to die a Christian death. He obeyed but, feeling his arms tied round the fatal post,
protested once again: “But I am innocent!”
“So was Jesus Christ,’ said one of the friars.” At this Burgos resigned himself. The executioner
knelt at his feet and asked his forgiveness. “I forgive you, my son. Do your duty.” And it was
done.
74
Sinibaldo de Mas, Internal Political Condition of the Philippines (1842). In Emma Blair and
James Robertson (eds.), The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898 (Cleveland: The Arthur H.
Clark, Co., 1903-1907), vol. 52, pp. 29-90.
The Internal Conditions of the Philippines was a controversial report written by Sinibaldo
de Mas, a Spanish official in the Philippines, and diplomat in Asia in the mid-nineteenth
century. This secret report was part of the third volume of Mas’ three-volume work on the
Philippines. The first two volumes were on the historical background of the colony, the
various challenges it was facing at the time, and its need for a more effective and efficient
colonial administration. First published confidentially in Madrid in 1842, and then publicly
the following year with a very few copies released, The Internal Conditions discussed
Spain’s three intentions with regard to the Philippines: perpetual possession, utter neglect,
and emancipation. Mas focused on the first and third intentions, although he advocated the
latter (emancipation) as he “cannot see what benefits [Spain could gain] from the colonies.”
The text below is part of Mas’ discussion on the three principles that would allow Spain to
control the Philippines in perpetuity. The focus here is the second principle.
Excerpt:
In order to conserve the colony, it is necessary, in my opinion, to work with reference to the spirit
of the following three principles, which I shall endeavor successively to explain: 1st: It is
advisable to reduce the Spanish-Filipino population to the least possible number. 2nd: The 11
people of color must voluntarily give respect and obedience to the whites. 3rd: The general 12 13
administration demands a complete reform.
…
2nd. People of color must voluntarily respect and obey the whites. In order to attain this object, it
is necessary to maintain the former race in an intellectual and moral condition which will make
of their numerical majority a political force less than that which resides in the second, just as a
pile of straw in the balance weighs less than a gold nugget. The farmer or the goatherd does not
read social contracts, or know more than what takes place in his own village. This is not the class
of people who have overthrown absolutism in España, but that class who are educated in the 14
colleges, and who know the price of guarantees, and fight for them. We must not depart from this
point of view, if we are to discuss the matter sincerely. The making of liberals must be 15
necessarily avoided, for in a colony the words liberal and insurgent are synonymous. The
11
Insulares or Philippine-born Spaniards in the Philippines.
12
Mas was referring to the native inhabitants of the colony
13
These were the “white” Spaniards in the colony.
14
The absolute power of a monarch
15
Educated individuals who advocated the recognition of the rights of the people
75
consequence of the idea will be to admit the principle that each step forward is a treading
backward. It is necessary to circumscribe the education to primary schools where reading,
writing, and arithmetic will be taught, continuing as at present with one school in each village,
and leaving their direction to the curas. The colleges for males now existing in Manila must be 16
closed. In English India, whose educational institutions and free government are of so much 17
weight with some, there is nothing similar to this, and an Englishman who wishes to become a
lawyer, a notary, a physician, or a military or civil official, has to go to England for study and
graduation—I say Englishman, for the natives do not even enter into the question.
In the service of arms, they must not rise beyond privates or at the most corporals. It is much 18
better to make a sergeant or officer from a Spanish farmer, even though he cannot read and write,
than from the more capable native. On the contrary, the more dexterous and deserving is the
latter, so much greater will be the mistake committed. Here the one who plays for gain loses. It is
less dangerous and more tolerable to bestow the rank of officer on a very stupid, vicious, and
cowardly fellow.
Priests, belonging to the religious orders, who administered the parishes
16
17
During that time, India was a crown colony of the British
18
Referring to the native inhabitants of the Philippines
