The most noteworthy places of this country are: San-hsii; Pai-pu-yen; Pu-li-lu, which is
located near San-hsii; Li-yin-tung; Lin-hsin; and Li-han. The products of that country are yellow
wax, cotton, pearls, shells, betel nuts, and jute [yu-ta] textiles. Foreign traders import porcelain,
commercial gold, iron vases for perfumes, leaden objects, glass, pearls of all colors, and iron
needles.
San-hsii, or the “Three Islands,” belong to Ma-yi. Their names are Ka-may-en, Pa-lao-yu,
and Pa-chi-neng. Each of these islands is inhabited by its own races, who are scattered
25
throughout them. But upon the arrival of the vessels, the natives assemble in order to trade. Their
general name is San-hsii. Their customs are about the same as those observed in Ma-yi. Each
tribe consists of about one thousand families. The country has many lofty hills and rugged rocks
which rise up like gigantic walls. The houses of the inhabitants are built of bamboo. The high
region of the country has few springs, but the women go to the banks of the rivulets and creeks
and thence back to the mountain bearing on their heads two or three jars filled with water, a load
that does not bother them. They ascend the mountain with the same ease as if they were on the
level. The interior of the valleys is inhabited by a race called Hay-tan. They are of short stature,
have round yellow eyes, curly hair, and their teeth can be plainly seen [showing] from between
their lips. They build their nests in the forking of the branches of trees, and a family, usually
consisting of from three to five individuals, lives in each nest. They wander through the
fastnesses of the thickets and invisible to the sight, shoot their arrows at the passers-by. On this
account they are greatly feared. When the trader takes them a porcelain jar, they bow and take it,
and then uttering cries of joy, run away with it.
When foreign traders come to one of their villages, they must not touch the ground, but
must remain aboard their vessel, which is anchored in the middle of the current and announce
their presence by beat of drum. Thereupon the savage traders approach in their light craft, in
which they carry cotton, yellow wax, strange cloth, cocoanuts, onions, and fine mats, and all
those things they offer for sale in exchange [for the articles of the Chinese]. In case of
misunderstanding in the price of the goods, it is necessary to summon the chief of the traders of
that place, so that he may present himself in person, and arrange the tariff to the satisfaction of
all. The imported objects are silk umbrellas, porcelain, and a kind of basket woven from rattan.
Foreign traders receive twice or thrice the value of the goods sold aboard, in order to serve them
as a bond of security. Afterward the foreign traders disembark and perform their contracts there,
and then return to their vessel. The goods pledged by the natives remain only three or four days
aboard the vessel, and then after the expiration of that term they are restored [to shore]. Then the
vessel visits another village of the savages, for the coast villages of the Three Islands do not have
one common jurisdiction. The hills keep the winds from the vessels during the continuance of the
northeast monsoon. But when the southwest monsoon begins, the dashing of the waves against
the coast is so violent that great currents are formed that do not allow the vessels to remain at
anchor. This is the reason why those who maintain trade with the Three Islands delay their return
for four or five months. Porcelain, black damask, and other silk fabrics, pearls of various colors,
lead, fishnets, and tin are imported. Pu-li-lu is near Three Islands. Its villages are very densely
populated, but its inhabitants are very cruel and inclined to piracy. The sea is full of reefs and
shoals, and the beach has rocks which are indented like dry wood, and their points are very sharp
like those of swords and spears. In order that the vessels may reach that country, they take a long
and circuitous route, in order to avoid those shoals. There are corals there, but it is very difficult
to get them. The popular and trading customs are the same as those which exist at the Three
Islands.
26
“Questions and Challenges in Philippine Prehistory”
F. LANDA JOCANO
The following is an excerpt of the seminal lecture of Filipino anthropologist F. Landa
Jocano entitled Questions and Challenges in Philippine Prehistory which was originally
published in the Historical Bulletin in the years 1983 and 1984. F. Landa Jocano holds an
MA and PhD in Anthropology from the University of Chicago. He taught at the
Department of Anthropology at the University of the Philippines where he later served as
its chairperson. He also taught at the UP Asian Center and the UP Institute of Philippine
Studies. The particular excerpt below is from the compilation made by N.M.R. Santillan
and M.B.P. Conde entitled Kasaysayan at Kamalayan: Mga Piling Akda Ukol sa Diskursong
Pangkasaysayan published in 1998. Jocano’s essay discussed the discipline of Philippine
Prehistory and is basically a synthesis of his findings during his years of research. It is in
this essay that he questioned the commonly held Wave Migration Theory and proposed his
own Core Population Theory.
Excerpt:
The inner value of scholarship is change. We cannot hold on to old ideas when new
empirical evidence no longer supports them. We cannot afford to continuously make the same
historical inferences from old data when new theoretical orientation leads us to advance new
hypotheses and to other better interpretations. Hypotheses are developed because we want to
have a clearer knowledge of the relationships between the data or sets of data we are studying.
As a general alternative to earlier ways of looking at Philippine Prehistory, as well as our
relations with the other peoples of Island Southeast Asia, the following proposals are advanced:
1. The peoples of Island Southeast Asia belonged to the same population. This is what we
call the core population. It grew out of the combination of human evolution which
occurred in Island Southeast Asia about 1.9 million years ago, as evidenced by the fossil
materials recovered from different parts of the region, and the movements of other
peoples from Asia mainland during prehistoric times.
2. The core population share a common cultural orientation as evidenced by similarities in
their tool tradition that included both flake and core implements and their complex
ceramic industries that included cord-making and designs made on the plastic surface of
27
unfired pottery with a carved paddle. Others shared cultural elements consist of similar
ornaments, pendants, house types, belief systems, ritual complex and funerary practices. 3.
The configuration of these shared elements into a common way of life is what we call the
base culture. It emerged from similar responses people made to similar geographical
conditions, climate, fauna and flora. Certainly, there were variations due mainly to the
relative isolation of some islands. But as a whole, there were (as there are still) more things
that ancient men in the region held in common than those which they did not. 4. None of
these ancient men could be categorized under any of the historically identified ethnic groups
(i.e., Malays, Indonesians and Filipinos) today. The Western colonizers were the ones who
fragmented the population into ethnic groups as they partitioned the region into their
respective colonies. Thus, variations in cultural and historical experiences started to become
clear-cut as the colonizers defined the boundaries of their territorial trusts. The British
popularized, in scholarship the term Malay to characterize the group of people they
encountered in the Malay Peninsula. The Portuguese, the Germans and the Dutch introduced
the Indonesians to the Western World. The Spaniards strongly worked for the conversion of
Filipinos (formerly Indios) to Christianity. Later on the Americans came and further
differentiated the Filipinos from their Southeast Asian cousins.
5. In this connection, the explanation of the peopling of the Philippines through a series of
waves of migration, as documented by folk history like the Maragtas, has to be
reconsidered. The undue credit given to the Malays as the original settlers of the region
and dominant cultural transmitter must be corrected. The movements of peoples during
prehistoric times were complex events which cannot be explained by the simple
sequential migrations of people from one are to another. Emerging from a common
population with the same base culture, the Malays, Filipinos and Indonesians are co-equal
as ethnic groups in the region of Island Southeast Asia, without any one of them being
racially or culturally dominant.
In conclusion, we hope that the base culture hypothesis may lead us to a concerted effort
towards better understanding of Philippine prehistory and enlightened cooperation among the
peoples of Island Southeast Asia. Now that our common heritage has been defined, we also look
forward to the emergence of regional consciousness and a common (regional and racial)
designation that none of the present names is capable of encompassing. May the base culture
idea equalize the roles of each group in the region, without one having to appear dominant
simply because of an allegation, without any supporting evidence, that they were the ascendants
and originators of cultures.
28
Kalantiaw: The Code that Never Was
The reading is an excerpt of William Henry Scott’s article entitled Kalantiaw: The Code that
Never Was.” Scott is known to be the American historian who first questioned the existence
of the Maragtas and the Wave Migration Theory which was partially based on the said
document. He specializes on the 16th century Philippine History as well as the northern
Philippine ethnic groups. His dissertation which he defended in the late 1960s at the
University of Sto. Thomas entitled Prehispanic Source Materials for the Study of Philippine
History has become a model of historical and historiographical criticism in Philippine
historical studies. The article at hand discussed briefly a part of his dissertation,
particularly the mythical code of Kalantiaw. This would somehow show that historical
study is a continuous consideration and investigation of sources. The sources are bases of a
meaningful past. There is therefore an absolute need to study them continuously.
Excerpt:
The Marco-Pavon Antigua Leyendas is the source, and the only source of the Kalatiaw Code.
The Code therefore can be no more valid than the forgery which contains it. It is entitled “The 17
theses or laws of the Regulos in use in 150 since 1433,” and was supposedly discovered in the
possession of a Panay ruler in 1614, its original being still in the possession of on eDon Marcilio
Orfila or Zaragoza in 1839. The figure “150” must mean 1150 in accordance with the usual
custom of abbreviating dates and the example in the second chapter of Part II where the year of a
Kalatiaw-built fortress is given as 433 instead of 1433. This makes the statement “in use in 1150
since 1433” ridiculous, of course, but no more ridiculous than the fact that the fort-building date
of 1433 appears in a source itself dated 1137. Despite these peculiarities, however, Robertson
published an English translation of the Code in apparent good faith in 1917, the same year
Soncuya published the Spanish version.
The name of Kalatiaw himself appeared in print for the first time in a 1913 article by Manuel
Artigas in the Renacimiento Filipino, “Informes ineditos sobre Filipinas,” which made mention
of “prehispanic civilization…a calendar, written laws, forts.” Artigas was the head of the
Filipiniana Section of the Philippine Library, and the year before, he had supplied footnotes to
Marco’s “Resena historica—which is a matter of fact, were much more scholarly than the book
itself. The name is documented in no earlier source, though digno alba of Kalibo, in connection
with the inauguration of the new province of Aklan in 1965, sought it in local folklore. I had tried
to get stories or legends from the present generations of Aklanons living in Batan,” he later
wrote, “but not one old man can tell me now.”
By this time, Kalantiaw was well on his way to becoming a National Hero. In 1966, Sol H.
Gwekoh’s “Hall of Fame” gave new biographic details—e.g., Datu Bendahara Kalantiaw was
born in 1410, his father was Rajah Behendra Gulah, and he became the third Muslim ruler in
29
Panay at the age of 16. Then in 1970, Gregorio Zaide’s Great Filipinos in History argued that his
real name was Lakan Tiaw and gave a direct quote— “The law is above all men.” The next year,
the Manila Bulletin reported the celebration of the 538thanniversary of the promulgation of the
Code on 8 December with the coronation of the Lakambini ni Kalantiyaw. Artist Carlos Valino,
Jr., depicted the event itself in oil on canvas with the law-giver reading from a node of bamboo
held vertically. The President of the Republic bestowed the Order of Kalatiaw on deserving
justices, and a 30-centavo postage stamp was issued to commemorate his name. finally, lest some
future generation forget a Filipino who “possessed the wisdom of Solomon, the fighting prowess
of Genghis Khan, and the sagacious statesmanship of Asoka, “his Code was fittingly inscribed on
brass in the Kalantiaw Shrine in Batan, Aklan.
The contents of the Code itself are no less peculiar. They were presumably promulgated by a
central authority of sufficient power to put local chieftains to death for failure to enforce them,
and prescribe 36 different offense irrationally group in 18 theses, punishable by 15 kinds of
corporal and capital punishment bearing no relation to the nature or severity of the crimes.
Legalist commentators have not been wanting to cite the codes of Leviticus or Hammurabi for
comparisons of severity, but what is incredible about the Kalantiaw Code is not its severity but
its capricious viciousness. Its catalogue of punishments alone sound like the fantasies of some
uninhibited sadist—plunging the hand into boiling water three times, cutting off the fingers,
laceration with thorns, exposure to ants, swimming for three hours, drowning weighted with
stones, beating to death or being burned, boiled, stoned, crushed with weights, cut to pieces, or
thrown to crocodiles.
One wonders what pedagogical mischief has been done to three generation of Filipino youth by
the belief that their ancestors suffered a society submissive to such a legal system.
30
The First People of Sulu
The following excerpt is from a story entitled “In Tau Nakauna” or the First People Sulu.
This was documented by Maduh Damsani of the Coordinated Investigation of Sulu Culture
(CISC), Efren Alawi of the Institute of Philippine Culture of the Ateneo de Manila and
Gerard Rixhon, the Director of the CISC. This was originally narrated by Mullung
(Muhammad Absari Salahuddin) of Anak Jati’ Indanan, Sulu. There are similarities to
other legends and myths from the Philippines and Southeast Asia and these are useful in
understanding somehow the unity of the ancient Filipinos, prior to the coming of Islam and
Christianity.
Once upon a time, our islands were unnamed and uninhabited. One day, it happened that a war
erupted in a country nearby. As the war ended, only five men managed to escape; two of them
were tall with long noses and the three others were quite short. These five left their country and
landed at one end of our island of Jolo where until then no people lived. Here they established
their residence where occasionally they heard a saw wild horse and wild carabao. For food, they
gathered what they found from the forest.
Sometime later, another war ravaged this same country. Again, five people were able to escape;
this time, they were all women. They too, left and landed on our island and met the first five
refugees. They were not 10 people, give men and five women. They lived together and begot
children.
One day, one of the tall men with a long nose and one of the short men decided to go in search of
some populated land. They left in a small banca which they paddled day and night. This trip took
not only weeks but months.
After some time, they ran out of food so they ate what they could get from the sea. When they
ran out of seafood, they found themselves scraping the bottom of their boat and eating what they
could pick from the scrapings. They wanted badly to touch land but there was none in sight, no
place to dock.
One night, at about two o’clock in the morning, their drifting boat suddenly stopped. They tried
to get it moving by rocking it, but they could not move it an inch.
They waited for daylight and they discovered that they had run aground. “We are lucky,” one
said. “Now we can go around and look for wood for new paddles. After all, there is no land
without any trees.”
One of them with a small ax got off the boat and went looking for wood the badly needed
paddles. With his small ax, he immediately started cutting a bamboo which was about 16 inches
in diameter. He did not make any dent in it and a voice was heard. “Hey don’t hit me!” Since
there was nobody, he lifted his ax but he heard the voice, “You don’t obey me, don’t hit me!” He
31
was afraid and at the third time he raised his ax he chose another spot to cut the bamboo. This
time there was no sound. He fell the bamboo slowly. As he split the bamboo, a discovered a
beautiful woman inside.
The lady in the bamboo told him that she was there hiding from a prophet who she refused to
marry after learning that the life of a prophet is not an easy one.
They proceeded to make their paddles and the man left in the banca was glad that there are now
the three of them. They starting rowing until the second night when they once again reach land.
In the morning, they found that they were on a rock why they called Bud Talipaw.
The tall man said that they should settle and make it their home. Not long after, the tall man
made love to Tuwan Putli Indal Suga and they lived as a married couple. Of this union, seven
children, all boys were born. As they grew big, their mother told the father, “Now that our seven
boys have all reached maturity, we better plan for their future, decide where they will live and
divide the land among them.
This is how the land was divided. Luuk was given to the son with black eyes; the Taglibi to the
son with green eyes; Talipaw went to the son with brown eyes. The boy with blue eyes was given
the trading center (Now Jolo town) while the son with the greenish eyes got Lipid and the son
with the white eyes Parang. Finally, the son with the yellow eyes received Sawaki. These were
the first seven men born in sulu, the people of Sulu, Lupa’ Sug as it was called. The name Islam
was to be added later when the Muslim faith spread to this part of the world.
