ARTICLE X
Local Government
General Provisions
SECTION 1. The territorial and political subdivisions of the Republic of the Philippines are the
provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangays. There shall be autonomous regions in Muslim
Mindanao and the Cordilleras as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 2. The territorial and political subdivisions shall enjoy local autonomy.
SECTION 3. The Congress shall enact a local government code which shall provide for a more
responsive and accountable local government structure instituted through a system of
decentralization with effective mechanisms of recall, initiative, and referendum, allocate among
the different local government units their powers, responsibilities, and resources, and provide for
the qualifications, election, appointment and removal, term, salaries, powers and functions and
duties of local officials, and all other matters relating to the organization and operation of the
local units.
511
SECTION 4. The President of the Philippines shall exercise general supervision over local
governments. Provinces with respect to component cities and municipalities, and cities and
municipalities with respect to component barangays shall ensure that the acts of their component
units are within the scope of their prescribed powers and functions.
SECTION 5. Each local government unit shall have the power to create its own sources of
revenues and to levy taxes, fees, and charges subject to such guidelines and limitations as the
Congress may provide, consistent with the basic policy of local autonomy. Such taxes, fees, and
charges shall accrue exclusively to the local governments.
SECTION 6. Local government units shall have a just share, as determined by law, in the
national taxes which shall be automatically released to them.
SECTION 7. Local governments shall be entitled to an equitable share in the proceeds of the
utilization and development of the national wealth within their respective areas, in the manner
provided by law, including sharing the same with the inhabitants by way of direct benefits.
SECTION 8. The term of office of elective local officials, except barangay officials, which shall
be determined by law, shall be three years and no such official shall serve for more than three
consecutive terms. Voluntary renunciation of the office for any length of time shall not be
considered as an interruption in the continuity of his service for the full term for which he was
elected.
SECTION 9. Legislative bodies of local governments shall have sectoral representation as may
be prescribed by law.
SECTION 10. No province, city, municipality, or barangay may be created, divided, merged,
abolished, or its boundary substantially altered, except in accordance with the criteria established
in the Local Government Code and subject to approval by a majority of the votes cast in a
plebiscite in the political units directly affected.
SECTION 11. The Congress may, by law, create special metropolitan political subdivisions,
subject to a plebiscite as set forth in Section 10 hereof. The component cities and municipalities
shall retain their basic autonomy and shall be entitled to their own local executives and
legislative assemblies. The jurisdiction of the metropolitan authority that will hereby be created
shall be limited to basic services requiring coordination.
SECTION 12. Cities that are highly urbanized, as determined by law, and component cities
whose charters prohibit their voters from voting for provincial elective officials, shall be
independent of the province. The voters of component cities within a province, whose charters
contain no such prohibition, shall not be deprived of their right to vote for elective provincial
officials.
512
SECTION 13. Local government units may group themselves, consolidate or coordinate their
efforts, services, and resources for purposes commonly beneficial to them in accordance with
law.
SECTION 14. The President shall provide for regional development councils or other similar
bodies composed of local government officials, regional heads of departments and other
government offices, and representatives from non-governmental organizations within the regions
for purposes of administrative decentralization to strengthen the autonomy of the units therein
and to accelerate the economic and social growth and development of the units in the region.
Autonomous Region
SECTION 15. There shall be created autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and in the
Cordilleras consisting of provinces, cities, municipalities, and geographical areas sharing
common and distinctive historical and cultural heritage, economic and social structures, and
other relevant characteristics within the framework of this Constitution and the national
sovereignty as well as territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines.
SECTION 16. The President shall exercise general supervision over autonomous regions to
ensure that the laws are faithfully executed.
SECTION 17. All powers, functions, and responsibilities not granted by this Constitution or by
law to the autonomous regions shall be vested in the National Government.
SECTION 18. The Congress shall enact an organic act for each autonomous region with the
assistance and participation of the regional consultative commission composed of representatives
appointed by the President from a list of nominees from multisectoral bodies. The organic act
shall define the basic structure of government for the region consisting of the executive
department and legislative assembly, both of which shall be elective and representative of the
constituent political units. The organic acts shall likewise provide for special courts with
personal, family, and property law jurisdiction consistent with the provisions of this Constitution
and national laws.
The creation of the autonomous region shall be effective when approved by majority of the votes
cast by the constituent units in a plebiscite called for the purpose, provided that only provinces,
cities, and geographic areas voting favorably in such plebiscite shall be included in the
autonomous region.
SECTION 19. The first Congress elected under this Constitution shall, within eighteen months
from the time of organization of both Houses, pass the organic acts for the autonomous regions
in Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras.
513
SECTION 20. Within its territorial jurisdiction and subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and national laws, the organic act of autonomous regions shall provide for legislative powers
over:
(1) Administrative organization;
(2) Creation of sources of revenues;
(3) Ancestral domain and natural resources;
(4) Personal, family, and property relations;
(5) Regional urban and rural planning development;
(6) Economic, social, and tourism development;
(7) Educational policies;
(8) Preservation and development of the cultural heritage; and
(9) Such other matters as may be authorized by law for the promotion of the general
welfare of the people of the region.
SECTION 21. The preservation of peace and order within the regions shall be the responsibility
of the local police agencies which shall be organized, maintained, supervised, and utilized in
accordance with applicable laws. The defense and security of the regions shall be the
responsibility of the National Government.
ARTICLE XI
Accountability of Public Officers
SECTION 1. Public office is a public trust. Public officers and employees must at all times be
accountable to the people, serve them with utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty, and
efficiency, act with patriotism and justice, and lead modest lives.
SECTION 2. The President, the Vice-President, the Members of the Supreme Court, the
Members of the Constitutional Commissions, and the Ombudsman may be removed from office,
on impeachment for, and conviction of, culpable violation of the Constitution, treason, bribery,
graft and corruption, other high crimes, or betrayal of public trust. All other public officers and
employees may be removed from office as provided by law, but not by impeachment.
SECTION 3. (1) The House of Representatives shall have the exclusive power to initiate all
cases of impeachment.
514
(2) A verified complaint for impeachment may be filed by any Member of the
House of Representatives or by any citizen upon a resolution of endorsement by
any Member thereof, which shall be included in the Order of Business within ten
session days, and referred to the proper Committee within three session days
thereafter. The Committee, after hearing, and by a majority vote of all its
Members, shall submit its report to the House within sixty session days from such
referral, together with the corresponding resolution. The resolution shall be
calendared for consideration by the House within ten session days from receipt
thereof.
(3) A vote of at least one-third of all the Members of the House shall be necessary
either to affirm a favorable resolution with the Articles of Impeachment of the
Committee, or override its contrary resolution. The vote of each Member shall be
recorded.
(4) In case the verified complaint or resolution of impeachment is filed by at least
one-third of all the Members of the House, the same shall constitute the Articles
of Impeachment, and trial by the Senate shall forthwith proceed.
(5) No impeachment proceedings shall be initiated against the same official more
than once within a period of one year.
(6) The Senate shall have the sole power to try and decide all cases of
impeachment. When sitting for that purpose, the Senators shall be on oath or
affirmation. When the President of the Philippines is on trial, the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court shall preside, but shall not vote. No person shall be convicted
without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the Members of the Senate.
(7) Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than removal from
office and disqualification to hold any office under the Republic of the
Philippines, but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to
prosecution, trial, and punishment according to law.
(8) The Congress shall promulgate its rules on impeachment to effectively carry
out the purpose of this section.
SECTION 4. The present anti-graft court known as the Sandiganbayan shall continue to function
and exercise its jurisdiction as now or hereafter may be provided by law.
SECTION 5. There is hereby created the independent Office of the Ombudsman, composed of
the Ombudsman to be known as Tanodbayan, one overall Deputy and at least one Deputy each
for Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. A separate Deputy for the military establishment may
likewise be appointed.
515
SECTION 6. The officials and employees of the Office of the Ombudsman, other than the
Deputies, shall be appointed by the Ombudsman according to the Civil Service Law.
SECTION 7. The existing Tanodbayan shall hereafter be known as the Office of the Special
Prosecutor. It shall continue to function and exercise its powers as now or hereafter may be
provided by law, except those conferred on the Office of the Ombudsman created under this
Constitution.
SECTION 8. The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines,
and at the time of their appointment, at least forty years old, of recognized probity and
independence, and members of the Philippine Bar, and must not have been candidates for any
elective office in the immediately preceding election. The Ombudsman must have for ten years
or more been a judge or engaged in the practice of law in the Philippines.
During their tenure, they shall be subject to the same disqualifications and prohibitions as
provided for in Section 2 of Article IX-A of this Constitution.
SECTION 9. The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall be appointed by the President from a list of
at least six nominees prepared by the Judicial and Bar Council, and from a list of three nominees
for every vacancy thereafter. Such appointments shall require no confirmation. All vacancies
shall be filled within three months after they occur.
SECTION 10. The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall have the rank of Chairman and Members,
respectively, of the Constitutional Commissions, and they shall receive the same salary, which
shall not be decreased during their term of office.
SECTION 11. The Ombudsman and his Deputies shall serve for a term of seven years without
reappointment. They shall not be qualified to run for any office in the election immediately
succeeding their cessation from office.
SECTION 12. The Ombudsman and his Deputies, as protectors of the people, shall act promptly
on complaints filed in any form or manner against public officials or employees of the
Government, or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof, including government-owned
or controlled corporations, and shall, in appropriate cases, notify the complainants of the action
taken and the result thereof.
SECTION 13. The Office of the Ombudsman shall have the following powers, functions, and
duties:
(1) Investigate on its own, or on complaint by any person, any act or omission of
any public official, employee, office or agency, when such act or omission
appears to be illegal, unjust, improper, or inefficient.
(2) Direct, upon complaint or at its own instance, any public official or employee
of the Government, or any subdivision, agency or instrumentality thereof, as well
516
as of any government-owned or controlled corporation with original charter, to
perform and expedite any act or duty required by law, or to stop, prevent, and
correct any abuse or impropriety in the performance of duties.
(3) Direct the officer concerned to take appropriate action against a public official
or employee at fault, and recommend his removal, suspension, demotion, fine,
censure, or prosecution, and ensure compliance therewith.
(4) Direct the officer concerned, in any appropriate case, and subject to such
limitations as may be provided by law, to furnish it with copies of documents
relating to contracts or transactions entered into by his office involving the
disbursement or use of public funds or properties, and report any irregularity to
the Commission on Audit for appropriate action.
(5) Request any government agency for assistance and information necessary in
the discharge of its responsibilities, and to examine, if necessary, pertinent records
and documents.
(6) Publicize matters covered by its investigation when circumstances so warrant
and with due prudence.
(7) Determine the causes of inefficiency, red tape, mismanagement, fraud, and
corruption in the Government and make recommendations for their elimination
and the observance of high standards of ethics and efficiency.
(8) Promulgate its rules of procedure and exercise such other powers or perform
such functions or duties as may be provided by law.
SECTION 14. The Office of the Ombudsman shall enjoy fiscal autonomy. Its approved annual
appropriations shall be automatically and regularly released.
SECTION 15. The right of the State to recover properties unlawfully acquired by public officials
or employees, from them or from their nominees or transferees, shall not be barred by
prescription, laches, or estoppel.
SECTION 16. No loan, guaranty, or other form of financial accommodation for any business
purpose may be granted, directly or indirectly, by any government-owned or controlled bank or
financial institution to the President, the Vice-President, the Members of the Cabinet, the
Congress, the Supreme Court, and the Constitutional Commissions, the Ombudsman, or to any
firm or entity in which they have controlling interest, during their tenure.
SECTION 17. A public officer or employee shall, upon assumption of office and as often
thereafter as may be required by law, submit a declaration under oath of his assets, liabilities, and
net worth. In the case of the President, the Vice-President, the Members of the Cabinet, the
Congress, the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Commissions and other constitutional offices,
517
and officers of the armed forces with general or flag rank, the declaration shall be disclosed to
the public in the manner provided by law.
SECTION 18. Public officers and employees owe the State and this Constitution allegiance at all
times, and any public officer or employee who seeks to change his citizenship or acquire the
status of an immigrant of another country during his tenure shall be dealt with by law.
ARTICLE XII
National Economy and Patrimony
SECTION 1. The goals of the national economy are a more equitable distribution of
opportunities, income, and wealth; a sustained increase in the amount of goods and services
produced by the nation for the benefit of the people; and an expanding productivity as the key to
raising the quality of life for all, especially the underprivileged.
The State shall promote industrialization and full employment based on sound agricultural
development and agrarian reform, through industries that make full and efficient use of human
and natural resources, and which are competitive in both domestic and foreign markets.
However, the State shall protect Filipino enterprises against unfair foreign competition and trade
practices.
In the pursuit of these goals, all sectors of the economy and all regions of the country shall be
given optimum opportunity to develop. Private enterprises, including corporations, cooperatives,
and similar collective organizations, shall be encouraged to broaden the base of their ownership.
SECTION 2. All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and other mineral
oils, all forces of potential energy, fisheries, forests or timber, wildlife, flora and fauna, and other
natural resources are owned by the State. With the exception of agricultural lands, all other
natural resources shall not be alienated. The exploration, development, and utilization of natural
resources shall be under the full control and supervision of the State. The State may directly
undertake such activities, or it may enter into co-production, joint venture, or production-sharing
agreements with Filipino citizens, or corporations or associations at least sixty per centum of
whose capital is owned by such citizens. Such agreements may be for a period not exceeding
twenty-five years, renewable for not more than twenty-five years, and under such terms and
conditions as may be provided by law. In cases of water rights for irrigation, water supply,
fisheries, or industrial uses other than the development of water power, beneficial use may be the
measure and limit of the grant.
The State shall protect the nation’s marine wealth in its archipelagic waters, territorial sea, and
exclusive economic zone, and reserve its use and enjoyment exclusively to Filipino citizens.
518
The Congress may, by law, allow small-scale utilization of natural resources by Filipino citizens,
as well as cooperative fish farming, with priority to subsistence fishermen and fishworkers in
rivers, lakes, bays, and lagoons.
The President may enter into agreements with foreign-owned corporations involving either
technical or financial assistance for large-scale exploration, development, and utilization of
minerals, petroleum, and other mineral oils according to the general terms and conditions
provided by law, based on real contributions to the economic growth and general welfare of the
country. In such agreements, the State shall promote the development and use of local scientific
and technical resources.
The President shall notify the Congress of every contract entered into in accordance with this
provision, within thirty days from its execution.
SECTION 3. Lands of the public domain are classified into agricultural, forest or timber, mineral
lands, and national parks. Agricultural lands of the public domain may be further classified by
law according to the uses which they may be devoted. Alienable lands of the public domain shall
be limited to agricultural lands. Private corporations or associations may not hold such alienable
lands of the public domain except by lease, for a period not exceeding twenty-five years,
renewable for not more than twenty-five years, and not to exceed one thousand hectares in area.
Citizens of the Philippines may lease not more than five hundred hectares, or acquire not more
than twelve hectares thereof by purchase, homestead, or grant.
Taking into account the requirements of conservation, ecology, and development, and subject to
the requirements of agrarian reform, the Congress shall determine, by law, the size of lands of the
public domain which may be acquired, developed, held, or leased and the conditions therefor.
SECTION 4. The Congress shall, as soon as possible, determine by law the specific limits of
forest lands and national parks, marking clearly their boundaries on the ground. Thereafter, such
forest lands and national parks shall be conserved and may not be increased nor diminished,
except by law. The Congress shall provide, for such period as it may determine, measures to
prohibit logging in endangered forests and watershed areas.
SECTION 5. The State, subject to the provisions of this Constitution and national development
policies and programs, shall protect the rights of indigenous cultural communities to their
ancestral lands to ensure their economic, social, and cultural well-being.
The Congress may provide for the applicability of customary laws governing property rights or
relations in determining the ownership and extent of ancestral domain.
SECTION 6. The use of property bears a social function, and all economic agents shall
contribute to the common good. Individuals and private groups, including corporations,
cooperatives, and similar collective organizations, shall have the right to own, establish, and
519
operate economic enterprises, subject to the duty of the State to promote distributive justice and
to intervene when the common good so demands.
SECTION 7. Save in cases of hereditary succession, no private lands shall be transferred or
conveyed except to individuals, corporations, or associations qualified to acquire or hold lands of
the public domain.
SECTION 8. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7 of this Article, a natural-born citizen of
the Philippines who has lost his Philippine citizenship may be a transferee of private lands,
subject to limitations provided by law.
SECTION 9. The Congress may establish an independent economic and planning agency headed
by the President, which shall, after consultations with the appropriate public agencies, various
private sectors, and local government units, recommend to Congress, and implement continuing
integrated and coordinated programs and policies for national development.
Until the Congress provides otherwise, the National Economic and Development Authority shall
function as the independent planning agency of the government.
SECTION 10. The Congress shall, upon recommendation of the economic and planning agency,
when the national interest dictates, reserve to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or
associations at least sixty per centum of whose capital is owned by such citizens, or such higher
percentage as Congress may prescribe, certain areas of investments. The Congress shall enact
measures that will encourage the formation and operation of enterprises whose capital is wholly
owned by Filipinos.
In the grant of rights, privileges, and concessions covering the national economy and patrimony,
the State shall give preference to qualified Filipinos.
The State shall regulate and exercise authority over foreign investments within its national
jurisdiction and in accordance with its national goals and priorities.
SECTION 11. No franchise, certificate, or any other form of authorization for the operation of a
public utility shall be granted except to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or
associations organized under the laws of the Philippines at least sixty per centum of whose
capital is owned by such citizens, nor shall such franchise, certificate, or authorization be
exclusive in character or for a longer period than fifty years. Neither shall any such franchise or
right be granted except under the condition that it shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or
repeal by the Congress when the common good so requires. The State shall encourage equity
participation in public utilities by the general public. The participation of foreign investors in the
governing body of any public utility enterprise shall be limited to their proportionate share in its
capital, and all the executive and managing officers of such corporation or association must be
citizens of the Philippines.
520
SECTION 12. The State shall promote the preferential use of Filipino labor, domestic materials
and locally produced goods, and adopt measures that help make them competitive.
SECTION 13. The State shall pursue a trade policy that serves the general welfare and utilizes all
forms and arrangements of exchange on the basis of equality and reciprocity.
SECTION 14. The sustained development of a reservoir of national talents consisting of Filipino
scientists, entrepreneurs, professionals, managers, high-level technical manpower and skilled
workers and craftsmen in all fields shall be promoted by the State. The State shall encourage
appropriate technology and regulate its transfer for the national benefit.
The practice of all professions in the Philippines shall be limited to Filipino citizens, save in
cases prescribed by law.
SECTION 15. The Congress shall create an agency to promote the viability and growth of
cooperatives as instruments for social justice and economic development.
SECTION 16. The Congress shall not, except by general law, provide for the formation,
organization, or regulation of private corporations. Government-owned or controlled
corporations may be created or established by special charters in the interest of the common
good and subject to the test of economic viability.
SECTION 17. In times of national emergency, when the public interest so requires, the State
may, during the emergency and under reasonable terms prescribed by it, temporarily take over or
direct the operation of any privately owned public utility or business affected with public
interest.
SECTION 18. The State may, in the interest of national welfare or defense, establish and operate
vital industries and, upon payment of just compensation, transfer to public ownership utilities
and other private enterprises to be operated by the Government.
SECTION 19. The State shall regulate or prohibit monopolies when the public interest so
requires. No combinations in restraint of trade or unfair competition shall be allowed.
SECTION 20. The Congress shall establish an independent central monetary authority, the
members of whose governing board must be natural-born Filipino citizens, of known probity,
integrity, and patriotism, the majority of whom shall come from the private sector. They shall
also be subject to such other qualifications and disabilities as may be prescribed by law. The
authority shall provide policy direction in the areas of money, banking, and credit. It shall have
supervision over the operations of banks and exercise such regulatory powers as may be
provided by law over the operations of finance companies and other institutions performing
similar functions.
Until the Congress otherwise provides, the Central Bank of the Philippines, operating under
existing laws, shall function as the central monetary authority.
521
SECTION 21. Foreign loans may only be incurred in accordance with law and the regulation of
the monetary authority. Information on foreign loans obtained or guaranteed by the Government
shall be made available to the public.
SECTION 22. Acts which circumvent or negate any of the provisions of this Article shall be
considered inimical to the national interest and subject to criminal and civil sanctions, as may be
provided by law.
ARTICLE XIII
Social Justice and Human Rights
SECTION 1. The Congress shall give highest priority to the enactment of measures that protect
and enhance the right of all the people to human dignity, reduce social, economic, and political
inequalities, and remove cultural inequities by equitably diffusing wealth and political power for
the common good.
To this end, the State shall regulate the acquisition, ownership, use, and disposition of property
and its increments.
SECTION 2. The promotion of social justice shall include the commitment to create economic
opportunities based on freedom of initiative and self-reliance.
Labor
SECTION 3. The State shall afford full protection to labor, local and overseas, organized and
unorganized, and promote full employment and equality of employment opportunities for all.
It shall guarantee the rights of all workers to self-organization, collective bargaining and
negotiations, and peaceful concerted activities, including the right to strike in accordance with
law. They shall be entitled to security of tenure, humane conditions of work, and a living wage.
They shall also participate in policy and decision-making processes affecting their rights and
benefits as may be provided by law.
The State shall promote the principle of shared responsibility between workers and employers
and the preferential use of voluntary modes in settling disputes, including conciliation, and shall
enforce their mutual compliance therewith to foster industrial peace.
The State shall regulate the relations between workers and employers, recognizing the right of
labor to its just share in the fruits of production and the right of enterprises to reasonable returns
on investments, and to expansion and growth.
522
Agrarian and Natural Resources Reform
SECTION 4. The State shall, by law, undertake an agrarian reform program founded on the right
of farmers and regular farmworkers, who are landless, to own directly or collectively the lands
they till or, in the case of other farmworkers, to receive a just share of the fruits thereof. To this
end, the State shall encourage and undertake the just distribution of all agricultural lands, subject
to such priorities and reasonable retention limits as the Congress may prescribe, taking into
account ecological, developmental, or equity considerations, and subject to the payment of just
compensation. In determining retention limits, the State shall respect the right of small
landowners. The State shall further provide incentives for voluntary land-sharing.
SECTION 5. The State shall recognize the right of farmers, farmworkers, and landowners, as
well as cooperatives, and other independent farmers’ organizations to participate in the planning,
organization, and management of the program, and shall provide support to agriculture through
appropriate technology and research, and adequate financial, production, marketing, and other
support services.
SECTION 6. The State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform or stewardship, whenever
applicable in accordance with law, in the disposition or utilization of other natural resources,
including lands of the public domain under lease or concession suitable to agriculture, subject to
prior rights, homestead rights of small settlers, and the rights of indigenous communities to their
ancestral lands.
The State may resettle landless farmers and farmworkers in its own agricultural estates which
shall be distributed to them in the manner provided by law.
SECTION 7. The State shall protect the rights of subsistence fishermen, especially of local
communities, to the preferential use of local marine and fishing resources, both inland and
offshore. It shall provide support to such fishermen through appropriate technology and research,
adequate financial, production, and marketing assistance, and other services. The State shall also
protect, develop, and conserve such resources. The protection shall extend to offshore fishing
grounds of subsistence fishermen against foreign intrusion. Fishworkers shall receive a just share
from their labor in the utilization of marine and fishing resources.
SECTION 8. The State shall provide incentives to landowners to invest the proceeds of the
agrarian reform program to promote industrialization, employment creation, and privatization of
public sector enterprises. Financial instruments used as payment for their lands shall be honored
as equity in enterprises of their choice.
Urban Land Reform and Housing
523
SECTION 9. The State shall, by law, and for the common good, undertake, in cooperation with
the public sector, a continuing program of urban land reform and housing which will make
available at affordable cost decent housing and basic services to underprivileged and homeless
citizens in urban centers and resettlements areas. It shall also promote adequate employment
opportunities to such citizens. In the implementation of such program the State shall respect the
rights of small property owners.
SECTION 10. Urban or rural poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwellings demolished,
except in accordance with law and in a just and humane manner.
No resettlement of urban or rural dwellers shall be undertaken without adequate consultation
with them and the communities where they are to be relocated.
Health
SECTION 11. The State shall adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health
development which shall endeavor to make essential goods, health and other social services
available to all the people at affordable cost. There shall be priority for the needs of the
underprivileged sick, elderly, disabled, women, and children. The State shall endeavor to provide
free medical care to paupers.
SECTION 12. The State shall establish and maintain an effective food and drug regulatory
system and undertake appropriate health manpower development and research, responsive to the
country’s health needs and problems.
SECTION 13. The State shall establish a special agency for disabled persons for rehabilitation,
self-development and self-reliance, and their integration into the mainstream of society.
Women
SECTION 14. The State shall protect working women by providing safe and healthful working
conditions, taking into account their maternal functions, and such facilities and opportunities that
will enhance their welfare and enable them to realize their full potential in the service of the
nation.
Role and Rights of People’s Organizations
SECTION 15. The State shall respect the role of independent people’s organizations to enable
the people to pursue and protect, within the democratic framework, their legitimate and
collective interests and aspirations through peaceful and lawful means.
524
People’s organizations are bona fide associations of citizens with demonstrated capacity to
promote the public interest and with identifiable leadership, membership, and structure.
SECTION 16. The right of the people and their organizations to effective and reasonable
participation at all levels of social, political, and economic decision-making shall not be
abridged. The State shall, by law, facilitate the establishment of adequate consultation
mechanisms.
Human Rights
SECTION 17. (1) There is hereby created an independent office called the Commission on
Human Rights.
(2) The Commission shall be composed of a Chairman and four Members who
must be natural-born citizens of the Philippines and a majority of whom shall be
members of the Bar. The term of office and other qualifications and disabilities of
the Members of the Commission shall be provided by law.
(3) Until this Commission is constituted, the existing Presidential Committee on
Human Rights shall continue to exercise its present functions and powers.
(4) The approved annual appropriations of the Commission shall be automatically
and regularly released.
SECTION 18. The Commission on Human Rights shall have the following powers and
functions:
(1) Investigate, on its own or on complaint by any party, all forms of human rights
violations involving civil and political rights;
(2) Adopt its operational guidelines and rules of procedure, and cite for contempt
for violations thereof in accordance with the Rules of Court;
(3) Provide appropriate legal measures for the protection of human rights of all
persons within the Philippines, as well as Filipinos residing abroad, and provide
for preventive measures and legal aid services to the underprivileged whose
human rights have been violated or need protection;
(4) Exercise visitorial powers over jails, prisons, or detention facilities;
(5) Establish a continuing program of research, education, and information to
enhance respect for the primacy of human rights;
525
(6) Recommend to the Congress effective measures to promote human rights and
to provide for compensation to victims of violations of human rights, or their
families;
(7) Monitor the Philippine Government’s compliance with international treaty
obligations on human rights;
(8) Grant immunity from prosecution to any person whose testimony or whose
possession of documents or other evidence is necessary or convenient to
determine the truth in any investigation conducted by it or under its authority;
(9) Request the assistance of any department, bureau, office, or agency in the
performance of its functions;
(10) Appoint its officers and employees in accordance with law; and
(11) Perform such other duties and functions as may be provided by law.
SECTION 19. The Congress may provide for other cases of violations of human rights that
should fall within the authority of the Commission, taking into account its recommendations.
ARTICLE XIV
Education, Science and Technology, Arts, Culture, and Sports
Education
SECTION 1. The State shall protect and promote the right of all citizens to quality education at
all levels and shall take appropriate steps to make such education accessible to all.
SECTION 2. The State shall:
(1) Establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of
education relevant to the needs of the people and society;
(2) Establish and maintain a system of free public education in the elementary and high
school levels. Without limiting the natural right of parents to rear their children,
elementary education is compulsory for all children of school age;
(3) Establish and maintain a system of scholarship grants, student loan programs,
subsidies, and other incentives which shall be available to deserving students in both
public and private schools, especially to the underprivileged;
526
(4) Encourage non-formal, informal, and indigenous learning systems, as well as self
learning, independent, and out-of-school study programs particularly those that respond
to community needs; and
(5) Provide adult citizens, the disabled, and out-of-school youth with training in civics,
vocational efficiency, and other skills.
SECTION 3. (1) All educational institutions shall include the study of the Constitution as part of
the curricula.
(2) They shall inculcate patriotism and nationalism, foster love of humanity,
respect for human rights, appreciation of the role of national heroes in the
historical development of the country, teach the rights and duties of citizenship,
strengthen ethical and spiritual values, develop moral character and personal
discipline, encourage critical and creative thinking, broaden scientific and
technological knowledge, and promote vocational efficiency.
(3) At the option expressed in writing by the parents or guardians, religion shall
be allowed to be taught to their children or wards in public elementary and high
schools within the regular class hours by instructors designated or approved by
the religious authorities of the religion to which the children or wards belong,
without additional cost to the Government.
SECTION 4. (1) The State recognizes the complementary roles of public and private institutions
in the educational system and shall exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all
educational institutions.
(2) Educational institutions, other than those established by religious groups and
mission boards, shall be owned solely by citizens of the Philippines or
corporations or associations at least sixty per centum of the capital of which is
owned by such citizens. The Congress may, however, require increased Filipino
equity participation in all educational institutions.
The control and administration of educational institutions shall be vested in
citizens of the Philippines.
No educational institution shall be established exclusively for aliens and no group
of aliens shall comprise more than one-third of the enrollment in any school. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to schools established for foreign
diplomatic personnel and their dependents and, unless otherwise provided by law,
for other foreign temporary residents.
(3) All revenues and assets of non-stock, non-profit educational institutions used
actually, directly, and exclusively for educational purposes shall be exempt from
527
taxes and duties. Upon the dissolution or cessation of the corporate existence of
such institutions, their assets shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law.
Proprietary educational institutions, including those cooperatively owned, may
likewise be entitled to such exemptions subject to the limitations provided by law
including restrictions on dividends and provisions for reinvestment.
(4) Subject to conditions prescribed by law, all grants, endowments, donations, or
contributions used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational purposes
shall be exempt from tax.
SECTION 5. (1) The State shall take into account regional and sectoral needs and conditions and
shall encourage local planning in the development of educational policies and programs.
(2) Academic freedom shall be enjoyed in all institutions of higher learning.
(3) Every citizen has a right to select a profession or course of study, subject to
fair, reasonable, and equitable admission and academic requirements.
(4) The State shall enhance the right of teachers to professional advancement.
Non-teaching academic and non-academic personnel shall enjoy the protection of
the State.
(5) The State shall assign the highest budgetary priority to education and ensure
that teaching will attract and retain its rightful share of the best available talents
through adequate remuneration and other means of job satisfaction and
fulfillment.
Language
SECTION 6. The national language of the Philippines is Filipino. As it evolves, it shall be
further developed and enriched on the basis of existing Philippine and other languages.
Subject to provisions of law and as the Congress may deem appropriate, the Government shall
take steps to initiate and sustain the use of Filipino as a medium of official communication and as
language of instruction in the educational system.
SECTION 7. For purposes of communication and instruction, the official languages of the
Philippines are Filipino and, until otherwise provided by law, English.
The regional languages are the auxiliary official languages in the regions and shall serve as
auxiliary media of instruction therein.
Spanish and Arabic shall be promoted on a voluntary and optional basis.
528
SECTION 8. This Constitution shall be promulgated in Filipino and English and shall be
translated into major regional languages, Arabic, and Spanish.
SECTION 9. The Congress shall establish a national language commission composed of
representatives of various regions and disciplines which shall undertake, coordinate, and promote
researches for the development, propagation, and preservation of Filipino and other languages.
Science and Technology
SECTION 10. Science and technology are essential for national development and progress. The
State shall give priority to research and development, invention, innovation, and their utilization;
and to science and technology education, training, and services. It shall support indigenous,
appropriate, and self-reliant scientific and technological capabilities, and their application to the
country’s productive systems and national life.
SECTION 11. The Congress may provide for incentives, including tax deductions, to encourage
private participation in programs of basic and applied scientific research. Scholarships, grants-in
aid, or other forms of incentives shall be provided to deserving science students, researchers,
scientists, inventors, technologists, and specially gifted citizens.
SECTION 12. The State shall regulate the transfer and promote the adaptation of technology
from all sources for the national benefit. It shall encourage the widest participation of private
groups, local governments, and community-based organizations in the generation and utilization
of science and technology.
SECTION 13. The State shall protect and secure the exclusive rights of scientists, inventors,
artists, and other gifted citizens to their intellectual property and creations, particularly when
beneficial to the people, for such period as may be provided by law.
Arts and Culture
SECTION 14. The State shall foster the preservation, enrichment, and dynamic evolution of a
Filipino national culture based on the principle of unity in diversity in a climate of free artistic
and intellectual expression.
SECTION 15. Arts and letters shall enjoy the patronage of the State. The State shall conserve,
promote, and popularize the nation’s historical and cultural heritage and resources, as well as
artistic creations.
SECTION 16. All the country’s artistic and historic wealth constitutes the cultural treasure of the
nation and shall be under the protection of the State which may regulate its disposition.
529
SECTION 17. The State shall recognize, respect, and protect the rights of indigenous cultural
communities to preserve and develop their cultures, traditions, and institutions. It shall consider
these rights in the formulation of national plans and policies.
SECTION 18. (1) The State shall ensure equal access to cultural opportunities through the
educational system, public or private cultural entities, scholarships, grants and other incentives,
and community cultural centers, and other public venues.
(2) The State shall encourage and support researches and studies on the arts and
culture.
Sports
SECTION 19. (1) The State shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs,
league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to
foster self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert
citizenry.
(2) All educational institutions shall undertake regular sports activities throughout
the country in cooperation with athletic clubs and other sectors.
ARTICLE XV
The Family
SECTION 1. The State recognizes the Filipino family as the foundation of the nation.
Accordingly, it shall strengthen its solidarity and actively promote its total development.
SECTION 2. Marriage, as an inviolable social institution, is the foundation of the family and
shall be protected by the State.
SECTION 3. The State shall defend:
(1) The right of spouses to found a family in accordance with their religious convictions
and the demands of responsible parenthood;
(2) The right of children to assistance, including proper care and nutrition, and special
protection from all forms of neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation, and other conditions
prejudicial to their development;
(3) The right of the family to a family living wage and income; and
530
(4) The right of families or family associations to participate in the planning and
implementation of policies and programs that affect them.
SECTION 4. The family has the duty to care for its elderly members but the State may also do so
through just programs of social security.
ARTICLE XVI
General Provisions
SECTION 1. The flag of the Philippines shall be red, white, and blue, with a sun and three stars,
as consecrated and honored by the people and recognized by law.
SECTION 2. The Congress may, by law, adopt a new name for the country, a national anthem, or
a national seal, which shall all be truly reflective and symbolic of the ideals, history, and
traditions of the people. Such law shall take effect only upon its ratification by the people in a
national referendum.
SECTION 3. The State may not be sued without its consent.
SECTION 4. The Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be composed of a citizen armed force
which shall undergo military training and serve, as may be provided by law. It shall keep a
regular force necessary for the security of the State.
SECTION 5. (1) All members of the armed forces shall take an oath or affirmation to uphold and
defend this Constitution.
(2) The State shall strengthen the patriotic spirit and nationalist consciousness of
the military, and respect for people’s rights in the performance of their duty.
(3) Professionalism in the armed forces and adequate remuneration and benefits
of its members shall be a prime concern of the State. The armed forces shall be
insulated from partisan politics.
No member of the military shall engage directly or indirectly in any partisan
political activity, except to vote.
(4) No member of the armed forces in the active service shall, at any time, be
appointed or designated in any capacity to a civilian position in the Government
including government-owned or controlled corporations or any of their
subsidiaries.
(5) Laws on retirement of military officers shall not allow extension of their
service.
531
(6) The officers and men of the regular force of the armed forces shall be recruited
proportionately from all provinces and cities as far as practicable.
(7) The tour of duty of the Chief of Staff of the armed forces shall not exceed
three years. However, in times of war or other national emergency declared by the
Congress, the President may extend such tour of duty.
SECTION 6. The State shall establish and maintain one police force, which shall be national in
scope and civilian in character, to be administered and controlled by a national police
commission. The authority of local executives over the police units in their jurisdiction shall be
provided by law.
SECTION 7. The State shall provide immediate and adequate care, benefits, and other forms of
assistance to war veterans and veterans of military campaigns, their surviving spouses and
orphans. Funds shall be provided therefor and due consideration shall be given them in the
disposition of agricultural lands of the public domain and, in appropriate cases, in the utilization
of natural resources.
SECTION 8. The State shall, from time to time, review to upgrade the pensions and other
benefits due to retirees of both the government and the private sectors.
SECTION 9. The State shall protect consumers from trade malpractices and from substandard or
hazardous products.
SECTION 10. The State shall provide the policy environment for the full development of
Filipino capability and the emergence of communication structures suitable to the needs and
aspirations of the nation and the balanced flow of information into, out of, and across the
country, in accordance with a policy that respects the freedom of speech and of the press.
SECTION 11. (1) The ownership and management of mass media shall be limited to citizens of
the Philippines, or to corporations, cooperatives or associations, wholly-owned and managed by
such citizens.
The Congress shall regulate or prohibit monopolies in commercial mass media
when the public interest so requires. No combinations in restraint of trade or
unfair competition therein shall be allowed.
(2) The advertising industry is impressed with public interest, and shall be
regulated by law for the protection of consumers and the promotion of the general
welfare.
Only Filipino citizens or corporations or associations at least seventy per centum
of the capital of which is owned by such citizens shall be allowed to engage in the
advertising industry.
532
The participation of foreign investors in the governing body of entities in such
industry shall be limited to their proportionate share in the capital thereof, and all
the executive and managing officers of such entities must be citizens of the
Philippines.
SECTION 12. The Congress may create a consultative body to advise the President on policies
affecting indigenous cultural communities, the majority of the members of which shall come
from such communities.
ARTICLE XVII
Amendments or Revisions
SECTION 1. Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitution may be proposed
by: (1) The Congress, upon a vote of three-fourths of all its Members; or
(2) A constitutional convention.
SECTION 2. Amendments to this Constitution may likewise be directly proposed by the people
through initiative upon a petition of at least twelve per centum of the total number of registered
voters, of which every legislative district must be represented by at least three per centum of the
registered voters therein. No amendment under this section shall be authorized within five years
following the ratification of this Constitution nor oftener than once every five years thereafter.
The Congress shall provide for the implementation of the exercise of this right.
SECTION 3. The Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of all its Members, call a constitutional
convention, or by a majority vote of all its Members, submit to the electorate the question of
calling such a convention.
SECTION 4. Any amendment to, or revision of, this Constitution under Section 1 hereof shall be
valid when ratified by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite which shall be held not earlier
than sixty days nor later than ninety days after the approval of such amendment or revision.
Any amendment under Section 2 hereof shall be valid when ratified by a majority of the votes
cast in a plebiscite which shall be held not earlier than sixty days nor later than ninety days after
the certification by the Commission on Elections of the sufficiency of the petition.
ARTICLE XVIII
Transitory Provisions
533
SECTION 1. The first elections of Members of the Congress under this Constitution shall be
held on the second Monday of May, 1987.
The first local elections shall be held on a date to be determined by the President, which may be
simultaneous with the election of the Members of the Congress. It shall include the election of all
Members of the city or municipal councils in the Metropolitan Manila area.
SECTION 2. The Senators, Members of the House of Representatives, and the local officials first
elected under this Constitution shall serve until noon of June 30, 1992.
Of the Senators elected in the election of 1992, the first twelve obtaining the highest number of
votes shall serve for six years and the remaining twelve for three years.
SECTION 3. All existing laws, decrees, executive orders, proclamations, letters of instructions,
and other executive issuances not inconsistent with this Constitution shall remain operative until
amended, repealed, or revoked.
SECTION 4. All existing treaties or international agreements which have not been ratified shall
not be renewed or extended without the concurrence of at least two-thirds of all the Members of
the Senate.
SECTION 5. The six-year term of the incumbent President and Vice-President elected in the
February 7, 1986 election is, for purposes of synchronization of elections, hereby extended to
noon of June 30, 1992.
The first regular elections for the President and Vice-President under this Constitution shall be
held on the second Monday of May, 1992.
SECTION 6. The incumbent President shall continue to exercise legislative powers until the first
Congress is convened.
SECTION 7. Until a law is passed, the President may fill by appointment from a list of nominees
by the respective sectors the seats reserved for sectoral representation in paragraph (2), Section 5
of Article VI of this Constitution.
SECTION 8. Until otherwise provided by the Congress, the President may constitute the
Metropolitan Authority to be composed of the heads of all local government units comprising the
Metropolitan Manila area.
SECTION 9. A sub-province shall continue to exist and operate until it is converted into a
regular province or until its component municipalities are reverted to the mother province.
SECTION 10. All courts existing at the time of the ratification of this Constitution shall continue
to exercise their jurisdiction, until otherwise provided by law. The provisions of the existing
534
Rules of Court, judiciary acts, and procedural laws not inconsistent with this Constitution shall
remain operative unless amended or repealed by the Supreme Court or the Congress.
SECTION 11. The incumbent Members of the Judiciary shall continue in office until they reach
the age of seventy years or become incapacitated to discharge the duties of their office or are
removed for cause.
SECTION 12. The Supreme Court shall, within one year after the ratification of this
Constitution, adopt a systematic plan to expedite the decision or resolution of cases or matters
pending in the Supreme Court or the lower courts prior to the effectivity of this Constitution. A
similar plan shall be adopted for all special courts and quasi-judicial bodies.
SECTION 13. The legal effect of the lapse, before the ratification of this Constitution, of the
applicable period for the decision or resolution of the cases or matters submitted for adjudication
by the courts, shall be determined by the Supreme Court as soon as practicable.
SECTION 14. The provisions of paragraphs (3) and (4), Section 15 of Article VIII of this
Constitution shall apply to cases or matters filed before the ratification of this Constitution, when
the applicable period lapses after such ratification.
SECTION 15. The incumbent Members of the Civil Service Commission, the Commission on
Elections, and the Commission on Audit shall continue in office for one year after the ratification
of this Constitution, unless they are sooner removed for cause or become incapacitated to
discharge the duties of their office or appointed to a new term thereunder. In no case shall any
Member serve longer than seven years including service before the ratification of this
Constitution.
SECTION 16. Career civil service employees separated from the service not for cause but as a
result of the reorganization pursuant to Proclamation No. 3 dated March 25, 1986 and the
reorganization following the ratification of this Constitution shall be entitled to appropriate
separation pay and to retirement and other benefits accruing to them under the laws of general
application in force at the time of their separation. In lieu thereof, at the option of the employees,
they may be considered for employment in the Government or in any of its subdivisions,
instrumentalities, or agencies, including government-owned or controlled corporations and their
subsidiaries. This provision also applies to career officers whose resignation, tendered in line
with the existing policy, had been accepted.
SECTION 17. Until the Congress provides otherwise, the President shall receive an annual
salary of three hundred thousand pesos; the Vice-President, the President of the Senate, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, two
hundred forty thousand pesos each; the Senators, the Members of the House of Representatives,
the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, and the Chairmen of the Constitutional
Commissions, two hundred four thousand pesos each; and the Members of the Constitutional
Commissions, one hundred eighty thousand pesos each.
535
SECTION 18. At the earliest possible time, the Government shall increase the salary scales of
the other officials and employees of the National Government.
SECTION 19. All properties, records, equipment, buildings, facilities, and other assets of any
office or body abolished or reorganized under Proclamation No. 3 dated March 25, 1986 or this
Constitution shall be transferred to the office or body to which its powers, functions, and
responsibilities substantially pertain.
SECTION 20. The first Congress shall give priority to the determination of the period for the full
implementation of free public secondary education.
SECTION 21. The Congress shall provide efficacious procedures and adequate remedies for the
reversion to the State of all lands of the public domain and real rights connected therewith which
were acquired in violation of the Constitution or the public land laws, or through corrupt
practices. No transfer or disposition of such lands or real rights shall be allowed until after the
lapse of one year from the ratification of this Constitution.
SECTION 22. At the earliest possible time, the Government shall expropriate idle or abandoned
agricultural lands as may be defined by law, for distribution to the beneficiaries of the agrarian
reform program.
SECTION 23. Advertising entities affected by paragraph (2), Section 11 of Article XVI of this
Constitution shall have five years from its ratification to comply on a graduated and
proportionate basis with the minimum Filipino ownership requirement therein.
SECTION 24. Private armies and other armed groups not recognized by duly constituted
authority shall be dismantled. All paramilitary forces including Civilian Home Defense Forces
not consistent with the citizen armed force established in this Constitution, shall be dissolved or,
where appropriate, converted into the regular force.
SECTION 25. After the expiration in 1991 of the Agreement between the Republic of the
Philippines and the United States of America concerning Military Bases, foreign military bases,
troops, or facilities shall not be allowed in the Philippines except under a treaty duly concurred in
by the Senate and, when the Congress so requires, ratified by a majority of the votes cast by the
people in a national referendum held for that purpose, and recognized as a treaty by the other
contracting State.
SECTION 26. The authority to issue sequestration or freeze orders under Proclamation No. 3
dated March 25, 1986 in relation to the recovery of ill-gotten wealth shall remain operative for
not more than eighteen months after the ratification of this Constitution. However, in the national
interest, as certified by the President, the Congress may extend said period.
A sequestration or freeze order shall be issued only upon showing of a prima facie case. The
order and the list of the sequestered or frozen properties shall forthwith be registered with the
proper court. For orders issued before the ratification of this Constitution, the corresponding
536
judicial action or proceeding shall be filed within six months from its ratification. For those
issued after such ratification, the judicial action or proceeding shall be commenced within six
months from the issuance thereof.
The sequestration or freeze order is deemed automatically lifted if no judicial action or
proceeding is commenced as herein provided.
SECTION 27. This Constitution shall take effect immediately upon its ratification by a majority
of the votes cast in a plebiscite held for the purpose and shall supersede all previous
Constitutions.
Ratified: February 2, 1987
