276
Lopez, Salvador P. “Bataan has Fallen” Presidential Museum and Library. Accessed
October 28, 2020. http://malacanang.gov.ph/1226-bataan-has-fallen/
A well-written but little-known broadcast piece about the struggle of the Filipino and
American soldiers, "Bataan has fallen" is the surrender announcement of the Filipino and
American forces against the Japanese forces during the World War II. It was radio broadcasted
inside Malinta tunnel in the evening of April 9, 1942. This message was written by Captain
Salvador P. Lopez, who later became the Philippine Ambassador to the United Nations and
President of the Univeristy of the Philippines. The announcement was delivered by 3rd
Lieutenant Normando Ildefonso "Norman" Reyes on the "Voice of Freedom" radio broadcast.
EXCERPT:
RADIO BROADCAST MESSAGE, AS WRITTEN BY CAPTAIN SALVADOR P. LOPEZ,
DELIVERED BY THIRD LIEUTENANT NORMANDO ILDEFONSO “NORMAN” REYES ON
THE “VOICE OF FREEDOM” RADIO BROADCAST OF APRIL 9, 1942 FROM MALINTA
TUNNEL, CORREGIDOR:
Bataan has fallen. The Philippine-American troops on this war-ravaged and bloodstained peninsula have
laid down their arms. With heads bloody but unbowed, they have yielded to the superior force and
numbers of the enemy.
The world will long remember the epic struggle that Filipino and American soldiers put up in the jungle
fastness and along the rugged coast of Bataan. They have stood up uncomplaining under the constant and
grueling fire of the enemy for more that three months. Besieged on land and blockaded by sea, cut off
from all sources of help in the Philippines and in America, the intrepid fighters have done all that human
endurance could bear.
For what sustained them through all these months of incessant battle was a force that was more than
merely physical. It was the force of an unconquerable faith—something in the heart and soul that physical
297
hardship and adversity could not destroy! It was the thought of native land and all that it holds most dear,
the thought of freedom and dignity and pride in these most priceless of all our human prerogatives.
The adversary, in the pride of his power and triumph, will credit our troops with nothing less than the
courage and fortitude that his own troops have shown in battle. Our men have fought a brave and bitterly
contested struggle. All the world will testify to the most superhuman endurance with which they stood up
until the last in the face of overwhelming odds.
But the decision had to come. Men fighting under the banner of unshakable faith are made of something
more that flesh, but they are not made of impervious steel. The flesh must yield at last, endurance melts
away, and the end of the battle must come.
Bataan has fallen, but the spirit that made it stand—a beacon to all the liberty-loving peoples of the world
—cannot fall!
All of us know the story of Easter Sunday. It was the triumph of light over darkness, life over death. It
was the vindication of a seemingly unreasonable faith. It was the glorious resurrection of a leader, only
three days before defeated and executed like a common felon.
Today, on the commemoration of that Resurrection, we can humbly and without presumption declare our
faith and hope in our own resurrection, our own inevitable victory.
We, too, were betrayed by Judases. We were taken in the night by force of arms, and though we had done
wrong to no man, our people were bound and delivered into the hands of our enemies. We have been with
mock symbols of sovereignty, denied by weaklings, lashed with repeated oppression, tortured and starved.
We have been given gall to drink, and we have shed our blood. To those who look upon us from afar it
must seem the Filipino people have descended into hell, into the valley of death. But we know that the
patient and watching men who said their simple prayers in the hills of Bataan, have not lost faith, and we
know that the hushed congregations in the churches throughout the land, drew from the gospel as Mass
renewed hope in their resurrection. To all of them we give today the message of the angel of Easter
morning: “Be not afraid, for He is risen.”
We, too, shall rise. After we have paid the full price of our redemption, we shall return to show the scars
of sacrifices that all may touch and believe. When the trumpets sound the hour we shall roll aside the
stone before the tomb and the tyrant guards shall scatter in confusion. No wall of stone shall then be
strong enough to contain us, no human force shall suffice to hold us in subjection, we shall rise in the
name of freedom and the East shall be alight with the glory of our liberation
298
Recto, Claro M. Three Years of Enemy Occupation, The Issue of Political Collaboration in
the Philippines. Manila: People’s Publishers. 1946.
Claro M. Recto held positions under the Laurel administration during the Japanese occupation.
He was the Commissioner on Education, Health and Public Welfare from 1942-1943 and the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs from 1943-1944. After the war, he was arrested and tried for
collaboration. In 1946, he wrote a defense and explanation of his stand in his book, Three Years
of Enemy Occupation which narrated the views and actions of the Filipino elite during World
War II. Known for his academic excellence and nationalist ideas, Recto fought his legal battle in
court and was acquitted.
In this excerpt, Recto highlighted the different views of the Americans and the Filipinos on the
issue of collaboration. According to him, the Americans who remained in the security of their
homes and were miles away from the brutality of the Japanese forces cannot appreciate the
courage of the Filipinos who faced the brutality of the Japanese conquerors. The Filipino leaders
on the other hand were more aware of the nature and character of events in the Philippines and
should not be “judged by standards of post-liberation thinking.”
EXCERPT:
Differences in points of new between Americans and Filipinos on the question of collaboration
Three and a half years under the Japanese rule the Filipinos suffered a living death. They came to
expect that each day would be their last upon this earth. They went throul,111 nameless tortures
and indignities. Hunger was to them a physical, gnawing pain, to which hundreds succumbed
daily in the streets, in the internment and prison camps, in the filthy dungeons of the military
police. The American planes that began to come in September 1944, sweeping and irresistible,
caused damage to civilian properties and casualties among the people. Later, more of them were
to meet death on the beaches bombed and shelled by Americans, in contested areas in the path of
their advancing forces and, finally, in the terrible holocaust that reduced Manila and other cities
and towns into rubble and ashes. Still, the Filipinos kept their faith. For their loyalty to the
United States they paid the supreme price in countless innocent men, women and children
abused and butchered by the Japanese, in thousands of homes destroyed; but even that was not
too much to pay for redemption and, they hoped, for the peace that was to follow.
However, it seems that peace and concord are not for them. Openly or behind the scenes, forces
are selfishly at work pulling wires that may plunge the country into more suffering and more
misery. Now that the Filipinos need more than ever to be united, they hurl accusations and
299
recriminations against one another, the bitterness of which is in no way assuaged by the
American leaders who, having expressed concern for their present situation, should be among the
first to deplore the existence of internal dissension here. These men against whom principally the
accusations are made have so far kept their silence; their hearts they still preserve the solicitude
that, during all their years of public service, they have felt for the country and for the people; and
in the spirit of true leadership that those years have instilled in them, they did not wish to make
matters worse by accepting their accusers' challenge to a public discussion, which would be
unavoidably fraught with passion and prejudice.
Those who alone can pass is easy to defy the enemy if one is thousands of miles away.
They have unquestioning faith in the judgment of their countrymen who remained here with
them under the Japanese rule and saw at first hand their acts and inner motivations. The man in
the street, the humble farmer in the field, the employee in the government, the true guerrilla who
fought and suffered a thousand hardships not because of ambition for personal glory and
postliberation political power, but because of pure desire to help the American cause; yes, the
American prisoner of war and civilian internee—these are the ones who are in a position to pass
correct judgment upon these leaders, because together they inseparably underwent, bore the
brunt of, and pulled through three long years of Japanese hell on earth. Not those who were able
to escape abroad to engage in profitable undertakings or who fled to mountains not to fight the
enemy but for reasons of personal safety, and lived there in comparative comfort and ease of
mind, coming out of their self-exile and hiding enriched and acclaimed as heroes and
superpatriots, only after the Japanese had all but surrendered to the returning victorious
American armies. And certainly not those who are without that virtue of humility which is the
beginning of wisdom—those pharisees who themselves served in the two puppet governments
and their instrumentalities if only in a subordinate capacity and then retired when they found that
the buy-and-sell mart was more profitable, and now appear, after the Japanese have been driven
out, in heroes' and patriots' clothing, because in their peacock's vanity they fail to perceive that
they too have feet of clay.
At this juncture, it seems opportune to remind ourselves of the words of a French physician, a
member of the French underground. to Demaree Bess, who quoted the statement ill his article '
'Which Way Will France Go?" appearing in the Saturday Evening Post's issue of November 18,
1944: ' 'Frenchmen who lived abroad came back here with preconceived notions about so-called
collaboration, notions which are nosy being altered. It was easy, in New York or London, to be
openly defiant of Germans, and it was tempting for the emigres to be self- righteous when they
first returned home. But as they talk with those of us who stayed here, they are beginning to
understand better what it meant to live under German occupation. The over- whelming majority
of Frenchmen never left France, and their judgments about who were and who were not
collaborators are beginning to prevail."
300
The American point of view
Washington high officials and the rest of the American people who throughout Washington high
officials and the rest of the American people who throughout the war remained in the security of
their homes thou- sands of miles away cannot begin to appreciate the utter misery and
defenselessness of the Filipinos in the face of the unexampled brutality and lack of principle of
the Japanese conqueror. They can- not truly understand the bargainings, the evasions, the
temporizings and the show of apparent cooperation with which the Filipinos had to placate the
ruthless invader until America could organize and bring back here her mighty armed forces. At
best, the American point of view with respect to the Philippines could not but be purely
objective, so much so that according to Admiral Richardson, former Pacific Fleet Commander. in
his recent testimony before the Pearl Harbor Investigating Committee. President Roosevelt told
him in 1940 that he (the President) doubted whether the United States would enter the war even
if Japan attacked the Philippines, but that the Japanese could not always avoid making mistakes.
That mistake was the attack on Pearl Harbor. At the hearings before the Congressional
Committee investigating Pearl Harbor it has been disclosed that in the high command conference
held in February 1941, General George C. Marshall. then and until recently Chief of Staff, made
the following statement: ' 'We really have two active defense issues—the Panama Canal and
Honolulu. They are the two great outposts of our defense. We have some troops in the
Philippines but the Philippines are so weak they could not be defended against any first class
power. They would have to be sacrificed." General Marshall testified also before the committee
saying that “he knew of no agreement before the veal' committing the United States to war unless
she was attacked."
After these meaningful revelations, paradoxical though it may sound, we Filipinos should feel
happy that the Japanese made the mistake of attacking Pearl Harbor. That mistake decided the
fate of Filipino democracy and civilization. Had the Japanese attack been directed against the
Philippines alone, the Filipinos, out of their loyalty to America, would probably have been in the
tragic situation of fighting America's war without America even being a belligerent. That, as the
Americans would say, would have left the Filipinos hanging out on a limb. And with America out
of the war, the Philippines, after a futile resistance which could have lasted month only, would
have been definitely incorporated into the Japanese empire, not even as an ostensibly sovereign
member of the co-prosperity sphere, because such propaganda stunt would have been
superfluous, but as a mere colonial possession like Korea and Formosa.
But Pearl Harbor was attacked and America entered the war. It was not America, however, but
the Philippines that became the gory battlefield of the war, and for over three years was virtually
converted into one big prison camp. It was not American cities that were destroyed, American
homes burned. fields laid waste, food supplies confiscated, private belongings looted, population
301
decimated by the action of the ruthless enemy. No American in the United States was deprived of
his home and thrown into the street; or ever lived in stark. abiding fear of the Japanese spy and
military police; or found himself between •non-cooperation" and the enemy torture-chamber; or
felt the sting of a slap in his face, the cold steel of a bayonet in his entrails, the pain of burning
flesh, or any of the countless torture methods employed by the Japanese. It was only natural that
the primary concern of the United States should be to win the war and to save as many American
lives as possible in the process. The retaking of the Philippines was not an end in itself but part
of an overall strategic plan. And when it came to the final execution of that plan, the objective
approach toward the plight of the Filipinos had to be maintained, even at the cost of almost
completely obliterating Manila and other cities and towns and killing thousands of civilians as a
result of the intense bombing and shelling.
The Filipino point of view
On the other hand, the Filipino leaders who were left here. During the occupation could not, for
the very reason that they are Filipinos, adopt the same detached attitude toward their country.
They had to tax their ingenuity and make the most of their practical wisdom to meet the grave
implications of the enemy invasion and occupation, in the face of the defenselessness and
bewilderment of the people. They had to feign cooperation and pretend to play into the hands of
the wily enemy because the latter was not only suspicious but already convinced that the
Filipinos were just waiting for the opportune moment to strike back. True they wished. as
fervently as did the Americans themselves, an American victory But at the same time, while they
could not plan to bring about that victory they had to face perplexing problems that were
immediate and no less urgent. While their faith in the ultimate triumph of American arms never
faltered, they had to plan not for a month or two of enemy rule but for a protracted period that
might well drag for many years. For America was, by her own admission. hopelessly unprepared
and the prodigious scientific achievements and productive power that were to turn the tide
eventually in her favor were not then reasonably fore- seeable in the near future. In the midst of
those terrible realities this handful of Filipino leaders was entrusted with the task of looking after
the well-being of their own people and trying to save the country from abject misery, even
possible extinction. How well and effectively they went about that task, only those whom they
served are competent to judge, not those in whose very selfishness the enemy found comfort and
assistance. President Osmena himself, in his Leyte speech, said that there were those among the
men who held public office during the Japanese occupation who were prompted by a desire to
protect the people and comfort them in their misery, and to prevent the Japanese from governing
directly and completely or utilizing un- scrupulous Filipino followers capable of any treason to
their people.
So, while the Filipinos who headed the government under the Japanese occupation, intent as they
were upon speeding up the liberation of the Philippines, were exultant over the formation of
302
guerrilla units, because these meant so much to the American war strategy, they could not, on the
other hand, feel so happy when the unwitting exploits of some of the guerrillas brought about
reprisals and death to whole communities of innocent people. And while the Americans. unaware
of the real nature and character of the events here, could close their eyes to the countless
robberies, rapes and murders commit- ted by lawless elements in the name of the resistance
movement but really prompted by lust and personal vengeance, if not from motives of banditry
pure and simple, these Filipino leaders could not so callously ignore them but, being powerless
to repress them effectively, at least had to morally condemn them, because such horrible crimes
and abuses had for their victims thousands of Filipinos and in the end weakened the power of
resistance of our people against the common enemy.
The conduct and actuations of the Filipino leaders cannot be judged by standards of post
liberation thinking.
Some would say that for all their good intentions the efforts of these Filipino leaders were of no
avail, as they were not able to pre- vent the enslavement of the people. Considering the
implacable enmity and bitter resentment between the Japanese and the great masses of the
people, which was daily coming to a crisis, and the deep distrust professed by the Japanese
toward the Filipino officials, it is doubtful whether any group of men could have done better in
the interest of their people. It is a matter of public knowledge that there was at the time a current
saying among the Japanese to the effect that with the exception of Ricarte and Ramos and their
followers, the Filipinos were ninety-five per cent pro-Americans and five per cent liars. Under
those circum- stances their efforts to protect the people could not meet with eminent success. But
that fact does not make them criminals; and it is unfair to judge their actuations at the time, when
the nation was dazed by defeat and everything was chaos and confusion, through the perspective
of victory and by the present standards of post-liberation thinking. They started with hopefulness
in the efficacy of what they had expected to do, but they could not then know the relentless
character of Japanese bestiality and double-dealing they had to put up with later on,
progressively became worse as the Japanese realized more and more the hostility and double
crossing tactics of the Filipinos, officials and masses alike. At any rate the events of the last four
months of the occupation have shown that if there had been no pretense of co-operation the
indiscriminate slaughter of the Filipinos would have been carried out from the beginning and
there would have been only a handful of them left to liberate in the end.
What would the Americans have done?
It would be interesting, from the academic point of view, to know what would have happened if
the Japanese had pressed their initial success at Pearl Harbor and actually occupied Hawaii or
some part Of the American mainland along the Pacific coast. Would the Americans in those
303
places have shown an absolutely uncompromising stand and resisted the enemy to the last
unarmed and defenseless man? Or while biding their time would they have also temporized and
bargained for terins that would give them at least a reasonable chance of survival? The
Americans in the Philippines, both soldiers and civilians, who surrendered to the Japanese or
were captured or interned, did exactly this. Self-preservation, individual or national, is an instinct
common to men of all races and to all countries of the world. If the war had been between the
Philippines and Japan as the principal belligerents the Filipinos would probably have found some
measure of protection in that very status. But the war was between the United States and Japan,
and the Philippines became involved only because it was under American sovereignty. It was a
situation that was exploited to the fullest extent by the Japanese and made the basis of their
propaganda that the Filipinos were not their enemies but brother Orientals whom they had come
to free. At the same time it was used to justify the measures of coercion and punishment they
employed, because if the Filipinos were not enemies they could not plead their pro-Filipinism as
an excuse for openly refusing to cooperate with the Japanese. Such refusal meant, in the Japanese
eyes, only one for and attachment to the Americans, and this in turn meant certain torture or
death.
Not only the Americans in the Philippines at the time of Pearl Harbor but also the Filipinos were
sacrifice to America's unpreparedness.
The problems thus faced at the time by these Filipinos now accused of political collaboration
were, from the subjective point of view, much more difficult than those faced by the Americans
who were concerned exclusively with the conduct and strategy of the war. The difference is so
patent officials and certain sectors or the American press, is perhaps unconsciously fortified in its
condemnation of these so-called political collaborationists by the belief that the moral fiber of a
Filipino is weaker than that of an American, so that where one would be betraying his country by
certain acts under a given situation the other would be incapable of intending such betrayal by
similar acts under a similar situation. Nothing else can explain why those brave American
soldiers who surrendered to the Japanese in the Philippines and who were forced to make
statements plainly pro-Japanese o or tending to give comfort to the enemy. should be lionized
and acclaimed as the heroes they really are, while the Filipinos who were forced to make similar
statements are now accused of having given aid and comfort to the enemy and are condemned in
the eyes of the world even before they are accorded a trial. There is somewhere the purpose of
exacting a higher measure of loyalty from the Filipinos than from America s own nationals. No
other explanation can be conceived of why General Wainwright, and the other American generals
and officers under his command, for instance, were, as President Truman said, a sacrifice to
America’s state of unpreparedness, while the Filipinos who perforce had to deal and bargain with
the Japanese on account of that very unpreparedness should now be called traitors. While it is
304
true that these Americans were prisoners of war, from the standpoint of freedom to act, both they
and the Filipinos were not free agents; they were both under pressure, taking orders In a sense
the pressure exerted on the from the erstwhile conquerors. Filipinos was greater, because while
an American could not be properly requested to make a pro-Japanese or an anti-American
statement, a Filipino who would decline to make not an anti-Filipino but a pro-Japanese or an
anti-American statement would appear in the eyes of the Japanese as pro-American and,
therefore, an enemy of Japan.
“Executive Order No 40: Initiating A National Campaign For The Cultivation Of Idle
Lands To Produce Food Crops.” Presidential Museum and Library. http://
malacanang.gov.ph/6369-executive-order-no-40-s-1942/
Jorge B. Vargas was designated to be the executive secretary of President Laurel during the
Second Republic. He issued this executive order on a national campaign that will enforce local
officials to produce food in idle land in the midst of food shortage brought by the war.
The document showed which food was prioritized for cultivation. Among these prioritized foods
were rice, corn, camote, cassava, gabi, cowpeas, soybeans, mongo. The document also allowed
local officials such as governors and mayors to distribute uncultivated public lands within their
respective jurisdictions to preferably unemployed for one year.
EXCERPT:
OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE EXECUTIVE
COMMISSION
MALACAÑAN PALACE
BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMISSION
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 40
INITIATING A NATIONAL CAMPAIGN FOR THE CULTIVATION OF IDLE LANDS TO
PRODUCE FOOD CROPS.
305
WHEREAS, as a consequence of the present emergency, many farms are abandoned and the
country is threatened with food shortage;
WHEREAS, the importation of essential food commodities is problematical under the present
circumstances; and
WHEREAS, food crops must be grown in order to avert hunger and forestall famine throughout
the land;
NOW, therefore, pursuant to the authority conferred upon me as Head of the Central
Administrative Organization by Order No. 1 of the Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial
Japanese Forces in the Philippines, and upon the recommendation of the Executive Commission,
it is hereby ordered:
1. That a nation-wide campaign for the cultivation of rice, corn, camote, cassava, gabi, cowpeas,
soybeans, mongo and other short-time food crops suited to local conditions, be started at once
under the joint sponsorship of the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture
and Commerce.
2. That it shall be the duty of all city and municipal mayors to distribute uncultivated public
lands within their respective jurisdictions among the citizens thereof preferably to those who are
unemployed in order to enable them to plant food crops therein for a period of one agricultural
year.
3. That if for any reason the owner or the one in possession of any private land is unable to
cultivate the same, it shall be the duty of the mayor of the city or municipality where such land is
located to turn it over to the citizens of such city or municipality preferably to those who are
unemployed for the same purposes and under the same conditions prescribed in the next
preceding paragraph.
4. That it shall be the duty of every person or persons to whom public or private land has been
turned over for cultivation to carry into effect the national food production campaign by planting
thereon the crops contemplated in paragraph 1 of this Order: Provided, That they may not alter or
damage any permanent improvements existing thereon: And provided, further, That kaiñgin may
not be resorted to without permission from the Director of Forestry and Fishery or of his
representative in the locality. When a portion of public lands is found more suited for agricultural
than for forest purposes kaiñgin shall be allowed.
5. That crops obtained on public and private lands distributed in accordance with paragraphs 2
and 3 of this Order shall belong to the grower and no rent for the use of the land shall be
306
collected: Provided, however, That a portion of the crops or so much thereof as may be
necessary, not exceeding ten per centum, shall be set aside and the proceeds therefrom turned
over to the Government as payment of the real estate tax corresponding to the year in which such
crops arc gathered or harvested.
6. That it shall be the duty of all provincial governors personally or through the agricultural
supervisors, to inspect the activities of the mayors in this food production campaign. The
governors and city mayors shall also submit a monthly report to the Commissioner of the Interior
and the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce on the progress of the campaign in their
respective provinces and cities.
7. That it shall be the duty of all provincial governors and city or municipal mayors who may
receive seeds, seedlings, cuttings, shoots, or tubers from the Government in the furtherance of
the national food production campaign to distribute such seeds, seedlings, cuttings, shoots, or
tubers immediately to the farmers for planting, and it shall be unlawful for them to utilize the
same for their own benefit, or to intentionally permit or give tacit consent to the diversion of the
same for consumption purposes.
8. That any person who neglects or fails to perform any duty enjoined by this Order, or who
performs any act which defeats or tends to defeat its purposes, or who otherwise violates any
provision thereof, shall upon conviction be punished with imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by fine not exceeding two hundred pesos, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at
the discretion of the court.
9. That the provincial governors and city or municipal mayors who infringe the provisions of this
Order shall, in addition to the criminal responsibility to which they may be subject, also be liable
to suspension or removal from office.
10. This Executive Order shall be printed in Japanese, English, and in the principal dialects of the
Philippines for distribution in all cities and municipalities.
Done in the City of Greater Manila, Philippines, this 14th day of May, 1942.
(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS
Chairman of the Executive Commission
307
