151
TOPIC 6 : American Period
List of Reading Materials:
1. Treaty of Paris
2. McKinley’s Prayer
3. Benevolent Assimilation Proclamation
4. Our Campaign for Independence
5. The Corner Stone of Philippine Independence
6. The Jones Law of 1916
7. The Philippine Organic Act of 1902
8. Diary of Carrie Chapman
9. The Philippine Independence Act
152
INTRODUCTORY ESSAY FOR THE AMERICAN PERIOD IN THE PHILIPPINES
The readings are designed to offer to the students the primary sources that will provide them the
context to be able to understand the narrative of the American occupation of the Philippines.
Presented in chronological order, the collection will let them read first the “Treaty of Paris of
December 10, 1898.” This peace agreement allowed the United States to gain possession of the
Philippine Islands. The next reading material is “McKinley’s Prayer.” The significance of this
excerpt is that it gives an insider’s view of how President McKinley arrived at his decision to
issue his famous “Benevolent Assimilation” Policy. Citing that it was God’s will that the US
should annex the Philippine Islands after praying hard supported the idea that occupying the
Philippine islands had a blessing from God and should be seen from the vantage point of the
Christian zeal of missionary work by way of spreading the good news to the natives of the
archipelago. The Philippine Bill of 1902 guides the students to appreciate one of the most
important decrees enacted by the American government in the Philippines. They will realize that
the most important element contained in the bill was the clause that called for the creation of a
lower legislative branch with elected Filipino representatives as legislators that will comprise the
Philippine Assembly. The next reading presents an excerpt of Gov. General Francis Burton
Harrison. This reading depicts the personal view of Harrison on the Filipino leaders and
politicians who were emerging as the new leaders of the government as well as the challenges he
faced in administering the colony. Following this excerpt is another excerpt from a book written
by Filipinos Palma and Kalaw that provides clear insights and details on why the respective
political parties were organized including the discussion of their political platforms.
The Jones Law of 1916 is the first formal and official declaration of the United States'
commitment to grant independence to the Philippines. This Law replaced the Philippine Organic
Act of 1902 (Philippine Bill of July 1, 1902) that served as the de facto initial constitution of the
Philippine Islands. The emphasis of this reading is the fact that among the salient provisions of
the Autonomy Act of 1916 was the creation of an all Filipino legislature which created the
Philippine Senate to replace the Philippine Commission which had served as the upper chamber
of the legislature. The next reading is an excerpt from the diary of Carrie Chapman Catt which
led to the creation of a movement for women to take up leadership roles in politics. Lastly, a
significant reading material for students to read about the American Period is the text of the
Tydings-McDuffie Act of 1934. Known as the Philippine Independence Act of 1934, this was a
U.S. law that provided for Philippine independence. Because of this, the Filipinos will now be
motivated to prepare for the establishment of the Commonwealth government..
153
Treaty of Peace between the United States of America and the Kingdom of Spain (Treaty of
Paris), signed in Paris, December 10, 1898
By the President of the United States of America
[Signed in Paris, December 10, 1898]
ANNOTATION
The Treaty of Paris, signed on December 10, 1898, was a peace agreement between Spain and the
United States that ended the Spanish-American War. Under the treaty, Cuba gained independence from
Spain, and the United States gained possession of the Philippine Islands, Puerto Rico, other islands in the
West Indies, and Guam.
The commission met from October to December 1898 and agreed upon that some colonies of
Spain including the Philippines be ceded to the United States. On 10 December 1898, without Filipino
representation and consultation, the Treaty of Paris was concluded. It was signed by representatives from
the US Government namely: Cushman Davis, William Frye, Whitelaw Reid, George Gray, and William
Day. The Spanish delegation on the other hand was composed of Eugenio Montero Rios, Buenaventura
Abarzuza, Jose de Garnica, Wenceslao Ramirez de Villa-Urrutia, and Rafael Cerero.
The Treaty of Paris was made up of thirteen articles that stipulate the conditions, obligations, as
well as benefits that the Governments of Spain and the United States could enjoy over the ceded islands.
It also stated that an amount of $20, 000,000 will be paid by the US to Spain after the treaty’s ratification.
The treaty did not go into effect until after its ratification. Initially, many American senators did
not favor it for they thought of it as unfair to the Filipinos and a manifestation of imperialism.
Unfortunately, the Filipino-American hostilities that erupted on 4 February 1899 in the Philippines
(known as the “First Shot”) changed the course of the tide. American propaganda made it appear that the
Filipinos instigated the hostility causing the breach of alliance and trust. Two days after, the treaty was
ratified with two-thirds of the majority in the US Senate.
The American and Spanish governments reckoned the Treaty of Paris as an instrument of Peace, but the
Filipinos resented its conclusion and ratification for they were not consulted and considered in its making.
Further, the provisions of the treaty were not for the benefit of the Filipinos but the imperialists, instead.
With the signing and ratification of the Treaty of Paris, the bitter relations between the Americans and the
Filipinos turned bitterer and eventually lead to another episode that was known as the Filipino-American
A Proclamation.
Whereas, a Treaty of Peace between the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen
Regent of Spain, in the name of her August Son, Don Alfonso XIII, was concluded and signed by
their respective plenipotentiaries at Paris on the tenth day of December, 1898, the original of
which Convention being in the English and Spanish languages, is word for word as follows:
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN REGENT OF
SPAIN, IN THE NAME OF HER AUGUST SON DON ALFONSO XIII, desiring to end the
154
state of war now existing between the two countries, have for that purpose appointed as
Plenipotentiaries:
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
WILLIAM R. DAY, CUSHMAN K. DAVIS, WILLIAM P. FRYE, GEORGE GRAY, and
WHITELAW REID, citizens of the United States;
AND HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN REGENT OF SPAIN,
DON EUGENIO MONTERO RIOS, President of the Senate
DON BUENAVENTURA De ABARZUZA, Senator of the Kingdom and ex-Minister of the
Crown,
DON JOSE DE GARNICA, Deputy to the Cortes and Associate Justice of the Supreme Court;
DON WENCESLAO RAMIREZ DE VILLA-URRUTIA, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary at Brussels, and
DON RAFAEL CERERO, General of Division;
Who, having assembled in Paris, and having exchanged their full powers, which were found to
be in due and proper form, have, after discussion of the matters before them, agreed upon the
following articles:
ARTICLE I
Spain relinquishes all claim of sovereignty over and title to Cuba.
And as the island is, upon its evacuation by Spain, to be occupied by the United States, the
United States will, so long as such as occupation shall last, assume and discharge the obligations
that may under international law result from the fact of its occupation, for the protection of life
and property.
ARTICLE II
Spain cedes to the United States the island of Porto Rico and other islands now under Spanish
sovereignty in the West Indies, and the island of Guam in the Marianas or Ladrones.
ARTICLE III
Spain cedes to the United States the archipelago known as the Philippine Islands, and
comprehending the islands lying within the following line:
A line running from west to east along or near the twentieth parallel of north latitude, and
through the middle of the navigable channel of Bachi, from the one hundred and eighteenth
(118th) to the one hundred and twenty seventh (127th) degrees meridian of longitude east of
Greenwich, thence along the one hundred and twenty seventh (127th) degree meridian of
longitude east of Greenwich to the parallel of four degree and forty five minutes (4°45′) north
latitude, thence along the parallel of four degrees and forty five minutes (4°45′) north latitude to
its intersection with the meridian of longitude one hundred and nineteen degrees and thirty five
minutes (119°35′) east of Greenwich, thence along the meridian of longitude one hundred and
nineteen degrees and thirty five minutes (119°35′) east of Greenwich to the parallel of latitude
seven degrees and forty minutes (7°40′) north, thence along the parallel of latitude seven degrees
155
and forty minutes (7°40′) north to its intersection with the one hundred and sixteenth (116th)
degree meridian of longitude east of Greenwich, thence by a direct line to the intersection of the
tenth (10th) degree parallel of north latitude with the one hundred and eighteenth (118th) degree
meridian of longitude east of Greenwich, and thence along the one hundred and eighteenth
(118th) degree meridian of longitude east of Greenwich to the point of beginning.
The United States will pay to Spain the sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) within three
months after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty.
ARTICLE IV
The United States will, for the term of ten years from the date of the exchange of the ratifications
of the present treaty, admit Spanish ships and merchandise to the ports of the Philippine Islands
on the same terms as ships and merchandise of the United States.
ARTICLE V
The United States will, upon the signature of the present treaty, send back to Spain, at its own
cost, the Spanish soldiers taken as prisoners of war on the capture of Manila by the American
forces. The arms of the soldiers in question shall be restored to them.
Spain will, upon the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, proceed to evacuate the
Philippines, as well as the island of Guam, on terms similar to those agreed upon by the
Commissioners appointed to arrange for the evacuation of Porto Rico and other islands in the
West Indies, under the Protocol of August 12, 1898, which is to continue in force till its
provisions are completely executed.
The time within which the evacuation of the Philippine Islands and Guam shall be completed
shall be fixed by the two Governments. Stands of colors, uncaptured war vessels, small arms,
guns of all calibres, with their carriages and accessories, powder, ammunition, live stock, and
materials and supplies of all kinds, belonging to the land and naval forces of Spain in the
Philippines and Guam, remain the property of Spain. Pieces of heavy ordnance, exclusive of
field artillery, in the fortifications and coast defenses, shall remain in their emplacements for the
term of six months, to be reckoned from the exchange of ratifications of the treaty; and the
United States may, in the mean time, purchase such materials from Spain, if a satisfactory
agreement between the two Governments on the subject shall be reached.
ARTICLE VI
Spain will, upon the signature of the present treaty, release all prisoners of war, and all persons
detained or imprisoned for political offenses, in connection with the insurrections in Cuba and
the Philippines and the war with the United States.
Reciprocally, the United States will release all persons made prisoners of war by the American
forces, and will undertake to obtain the release of all Spanish prisoners in the hands of the
insurgents in Cuba and the Philippines.
The Government of the United States will at its own cost return to Spain and the Government of
Spain will at its own cost return to the United States, Cuba, Porto Rico, and the Philippines,
156
according to the situation of their respective homes, prisoners released or caused to be released
by them, respectively, under this article.
ARTICLE VII
The United States and Spain mutually relinquish all claims for indemnity, national and
individual, of every kind, of either Government, or of its citizens or subjects, against the other
Government that may have arisen since the beginning of the late insurrection in Cuba and prior
to the exchange of ratifications of the present treaty, including all claims for indemnity for the
cost of the war.
The United States will adjudicate and settle the claims of its citizens against Spain relinquished
in this article.
ARTICLE VIII
In conformity with the provisions of Articles I, II, and III of this treaty, Spain relinquishes in
Cuba, and cedes in Porto Rico and other islands in the West Indies, in the island of Guam, and in
the Philippine Archipelago, all the buildings, wharves, barracks, forts, structures, public
highways and other immovable property which, in conformity with law, belong to the public
domain, and as such belong to the Crown of Spain.
And it is hereby declared that the relinquishment or cession, as the case may be, to which the
preceding paragraph refers, cannot in any respect impair the property or rights which by law
belong to the peaceful possession of property of all kinds, of provinces, municipalities, public or
private establishments, ecclesiastical or civic bodies, or any other associations having legal
capacity to acquire and possess property in the aforesaid territories renounced or ceded, or of
private individuals, of whatsoever nationality such individuals may be.
The aforesaid relinquishment or cession, as the case may be, includes all documents exclusively
referring to the sovereignty relinquished or ceded that may exist in the archives of the Peninsula.
Where any document in such archives only in part relates to said sovereignty, a copy of such part
will be furnished whenever it shall be requested. Like rules shall be reciprocally observed in
favor of Spain in respect of documents in the archives of the islands above referred to.
In the aforesaid relinquishment or cession, as the case may be, are also included such rights as
the Crown of Spain and its authorities possess in respect of the official archives and records,
executive as well as judicial, in the island above referred to, which relate to said islands or the
rights and property of their inhabitants. Such archives and records shall be carefully preserved,
and private persons shall without distinction have the right to require, in accordance with law,
authenticated copies of the contracts, wills and other instruments forming part of notarial
protocols or files, or which may be contained in the executive or judicial archives, be the latter in
Spain or in the islands aforesaid.
ARTICLE IX
157
Spanish subjects, natives of the Peninsula, residing in the territory over which Spain by the
present treaty relinquishes or cedes her sovereignty, may remain in such territory or may remove
therefrom, retaining in either event all their rights of property, including the right to sell or
dispose of such property or of its proceeds; and they shall also have the right to carry on their
industry, commerce and professions, being subject in respect thereof to such laws as are
applicable to other foreigners. In case they remain in the territory they may preserve their
allegiance to the Crown of Spain by making, before a court of record, within a year from the date
of the exchange of ratifications of this treaty, a declaration of their decision to preserve such
allegiance; in default of which declaration they shall be held to have renounced it and to have
adopted the nationality of the territory in which they may reside.
The civil rights and political status of the native inhabitants of the territories hereby ceded to the
United States shall be determined by the Congress.
ARTICLE X
The inhabitants of the territories over which Spain relinquishes or cedes her sovereignty shall be
secured in the free exercise of their religion.
ARTICLE XI
The Spaniards residing in the territories over which Spain by this treaty cedes or relinquishes her
sovereignty shall be subject in matters civil as well as criminal to the jurisdiction of the courts of
the country wherein they reside, pursuant to the ordinary laws governing the same; and they shall
have the right to appear before such courts, and to pursue the same course as citizens of the
country to which the courts belong.
ARTICLE XII
Judicial proceedings pending at the time of the exchange of ratifications of this treaty in the
territories over which Spain relinquishes or cedes her sovereignty shall be determined according
to the following rules:
1. Judgments rendered either in civil suits between private individuals, or in criminal matters,
before the date mentioned, and with respect to which there is no recourse or rights of review
under the Spanish law, shall be deemed to be final, and shall be executed in due form by
competent authority in the territory within which such judgments should be carried out.
2. Civil suits between private individuals which may on the date mentioned be undetermined
shall be prosecuted to judgment before the court in which they may then be pending or in the
court that may be substituted therefor.
3. Criminal actions pending on the date mentioned before the Supreme Court of Spain against
citizens of the territory which by this treaty ceases to be Spanish shall continue under its
jurisdiction until final judgment; but, such judgment having been rendered, the execution thereof
shall be committed to the competent authority of the place in which the case arose.
158
ARTICLE XIII
The rights of property secured by copyrights and patents acquired by Spaniards in the Island of
Cuba, and in Porto Rico, the Philippines and other ceded territories, at the time of the exchange
of the ratifications of this treaty, shall continue to be respected. Spanish scientific, literary and
artistic works, not subversive of public order in the territories in question, shall continue to be
admitted free of duty into such territories, for the period often years, to be reckoned from the
date of the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty.
ARTICLE XIV
Spain shall have the power to establish consular officers in the ports places of the territories, the
sovereignty over which has been either relinquished or ceded by the present treaty.
ARTICLE XV
The Government of each country will, for the term of ten years, accord to the merchant vessels
of the other country the same treatment in respect of all port charges, including entrance and
clearance dues, light dues, and tonnage duties, as its accords to its own merchant vessels, not
engaged in the coastwise trade.
This article may at any time be terminated on six months’ notice given by either Government to
the other.
ARTICLE XVI
It is understood that any obligations assumed in this treaty by the United States with respect to
Cuba are limited to the time of its occupancy thereof; but it will upon the termination of such
occupancy, advise any Government established in the island to assume the same obligations.
ARTICLE XVII
The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the United States, by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate thereof, and by Her Majesty the Queen Regent of Spain; and the
ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington within six months from the date hereof, or earlier
if possible.
In faith whereof, we, the respective Plenipotentiaries, have signed this treaty and have hereunto
affixed our seals.
Done in duplicate at Paris, the tenth day of December, in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and ninety-eight.
WILLIAM R. DAY
CUSHMAN K. DAVIS
WM P. FRYE
GEO. GRAY
WHITELAW REID.
159
EUGENIO MONTERO RIOS
B. DEABARDUZA
J. DE GARNICA
W R DE VILLA URRUTIA
RAFAEL CERERO
And whereas, the said Convention has been duly ratified on both parts, and the ratifications of
the two Governments were exchanged in the City of Washington, on the eleventh day of April,
one thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine;
Now, therefore, be it known that I, William McKinley, President of the United States of America,
have caused the said Convention to be made public, to the end that the same and every article
and clause thereof may be observed and fulfilled with good faith by the United States and the
citizens thereof.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be
affixed.
Done at the City of Washington, this eleventh day of April, in the year of Our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and ninety-nine, and of the Independence of the United States the one hundred and
twenty-third.
Signed: William McKinley
160
President William McKinley’s Prayer
ANNOTATION
The section is an excerpt written by Homer C. Stuntz who was the pioneering missionary of the
Board of Missions of the Methodist Church. His close friendship with Governor Howard Taft allowed him
to write about the Philippines where he stayed for two years. This piece of information stemmed from the
fact that President McKinley was a devout Methodist Christian and he shared his thoughts with a group of
American Methodist dignitaries who visited him at the White House on November 21, 1899. The
significance of this excerpt is that it gives an insider’s view of how President McKinley arrived at his
decision to issue his famous “Benevolent Assimilation” Policy. Citing that it was God’s will that the US
should annex the Philippine Islands after praying hard supported the idea that occupying the Philippine
islands had a blessing from God and should be seen from the vantage point of the Christian zeal of
missionary work by way of spreading the good news to the natives of the archipelago. This “divine
revelation” would eventually shape the annexation of the Philippine islands to implement America’s
imperialist aspirations.
Meantime the question of what to do with the Philippines was the one which perplexed
our authorities in Washington. President McKinley faced it, and sought advice from all parties.
Perhaps the fullest unofficial statement he ever made of the way his own conclusion to hold the
Islands was reached is contained in his address to a committee of clergymen, as reported in the
Christian Advocate by General James. F. Rusling. General Rusling was a member of a committee
from a religious gathering in Washington to present resolutions of thanks to President McKinley
for courtesies shown its members, and, with Bishop Thomas Bowman, Bishop John F. Hurst, and
Drs. Upham and Buckley, met with the President by appointment in his private office in the
White House for that purpose, November 21, 1899. After a pleasant interview the members of
the committee rose to take their leave. The President detained them to give the following
statement:
“Before you go I would like to say just a word about the Philippine business. I have been
criticized a good deal about the Philippines, but don’t deserve it. The truth is, I didn’t want the
Philippines, and when they came to us, as a gift from the gods, I did not know what to do with
them. When the Spanish War broke out, Dewey was at Hong-Kong, and I ordered him to go to
Manila, and he had to; because, if defeated, he had no place to refit on that side of the globe, and
if the Dons were victorious they would likely cross the Pacific and ravage our Oregon and
California coasts. And so he had to destroy the Spanish fleet, and did it! But that was as far as I
though then.
“When I next realized that the Philippines had dropped into our lap, I confess I did not
know what to do with them. I sought counsel from all sides – Democrats as well as Republicans
– but got little help. I thought first we would take only Manila; then Luzon; then other islands,
perhaps, also. I walked the floor of the White house night after night until midnight; and I am not
ashamed to to tell you, gentlemen, that I went down on my knees and prayed Almighty God for
light and guidance more than one night. And one night late it came to me this way – I don’t know
161
hot it was, but it came: (1) That we could not give them back to Spain—that would be cowardly
and dishonorable; (2) That we could not turn them over to France or Germany—our commercial
rivals in the Orient—that would be bad business and discreditable; (3) That we could not leave
them to themselves—they were unfit for self-government—and they would soon have anarchy
and misrule over there worse than Spain’s was; and (4) That there was nothing left for us to do
but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them,
and, by God’s grace, do the very best we could by them, as our fellow-men for whom Christ also
died. And then I went to bed, and went to sleep, and slept soundly, and the next morning I sent
for the chief engineer of the War Department (ou map-maker), and told hi, to put the Philippines
on the map of the United States (pointing to a large map on the wall of his office); and there they
are, and there will stay while I am President!”
The American occupation of the Philippines was undertaken with motives as humane and
disinterested as those which drove us to war with Spain at first. The fact is, that the hour of
destiny had struck. The forbearance of a just God was exhausted. Spain must dispossessed of
territories which she had ruled with force and cruelty. A new order must begin.
162
Benevolent Assimilation Policy Declaration
EXECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON,December 21, 1898.
ANNOTATION
On Dec. 21, 1898, President McKinley issued the BENEVOLENT ASSIMILATION
PROCLAMATION, announced in the Philippines on Jan. 4, 1899, which stated the U.S.' "humane"
mission in acquiring the Philippines. He emphasized that the U.S. have "come, not as invaders or
conquerors, but as friends, to protect the natives in their homes, in their employment, and their personal
and religious rights." He proclaimed after the signing of the Treaty of Paris, asserting that the “military
government maintained in Manila is to be extended to the whole Philippine islands and that the United
States government assumes full control and sovereignty of the Spanish government over the Philippines.
After a lengthy debate, the U.S congress ratified the treaty on February 6, 1899.
Moreover, the U.S. wanted to "win the confidence, respect, and affection of the inhabitants of the
Philippines by assuring them in every possible way that full measure of individual rights and liberties
which is the heritage of free peoples, and by proving to them that the mission of the United States is one
of benevolent assimilation substituting the mild sway of justice and right for arbitrary rule." From the
proclamation itself, President McKinley had denied the very concept of the declaration of war against
Spain by deciding to annex the Philippines.
The destruction of the Spanish fleet in the harbor of Manila by the United States
naval squadron commanded by Rear-Admiral Dewey, followed by the reduction of the city
and the surrender of the Spanish forces, practically effected the conquest of the Philippine
Islands and the suspension of the Spanish sovereignity therein. With the signature of the
treaty of peace between the United States and Spain by their respective plenipotentiaries at
Paris on the 10th instant, and as a result of the victories of American arms, the future
control, disposition, and government of the Philippine Islands are ceded to the United
States. In the fulfillment of the rights of sovereignty thus acquired and the responsible
obligations of government thus assumed, the actual occupation and administration of the
entire group of the Philippine Islands becomes immediately necessary, and the military
government heretofore maintained by the united states in the city, harbor, and bay of Manila
is to be extended with all possible dispatch to the whole of the ceded territory.
In performing this duty the military commander of the United States is enjoined to
make known to the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands that in succeeding to the
sovereignity of Spain, in severing the former political relations, and in establishing a new
political power, the authority of the United States is to be exerted for the securing of the
persons and property of the people of the islands and for the confirmation of all their private
rights and relations. It will be the duty of the commander of the forces of occupation to
announce and proclaim in the most public manner that we come, not as invaders or
163
conquerors, but as friends, to protect the natives in their homes, in their employments, and
in their personal and religious rights. All persons who, either by active aid or by honest
submission, co-operate with the Government of the United States to give effect to these
beneficent purposes will receive the reward of its support and protection. All others will be
brought within the lawful rule we have assumed, with firmness if need be, but without
severity, so far as possible. Within the absolute domain of military authority, which
necessarily is and must remain supreme in the ceded territory until the legislation of the
United States shall otherwise provide, the municipal laws of the territory in respect to
private rights and property and the repression of crime are to be considered as continuing in
force, and to be administered by the ordinary tribunals, so far as practicable. The operations
of civil and municipal government are to be performed by such officers as may accept the
supremacy of the United States by taking the oath of allegiance, or by officers chosen, as far
as practicable, from the inhabitants of the islands. While the control of all the public
property and the revenues of the state passes with the cession, and while the use and
management of all public means of transportation are necessarily reserved to the authority
of the United States, private property, whether belonging to individuals or corporations, is
to be respected except for cause duly established. The taxes and duties heretofore payable
by the inhabitants to the late government become payable to the authorities of the United
States unless it be seen fit to substitute for them other reasonable rates or modes of
contribution to the expenses of government, whether general or local. If private property be
taken for military use, it shall be paid for when possible in cash, at a fair valuation, and
when payment in cash is not practicable, receipts are to be given. All ports and places in the
Philippine Islands in the actual possession of the land and naval forces of the United States
will be opened to the commerce of all friendly nations. All goods and wares not prohibited
for military reasons by due announcement of the military authority will be admitted upon
payment of such duties and other charges as shall be in force at the time of their
importation. Finally, it should be the earnest wish and paramount aim of the military
administration to win the confidence, respect, and affection of the inhabitants of the
Philippines by assuring them in every possible way that full measure of individual rights
and liberties which is the heritage of free peoples, and by proving to them that the mission
of the United States is one of
BENEVOLENT ASSIMILATION
substituting the mild sway of justice and right for arbitrary rule. In the fulfillment of this
high mission, supporting the temperate administration of affairs for the greatest good of the
governed, there must be sedulously maintained the strong arm of authority, to repress
disturbance and to overcome all obstacles to the bestowal of the blessings of good and
stable government upon the people of the Philippine Islands under the free flag of the
United States.
WILLIAM McKINLEY.
164
Excerpt from Palma, R., Kalaw, T. M. (Teodoro Manguiat). (1923). Our campaign for
independence from Taft to Harrison (1901-1921). Manila: Bureau of printing. pp 15 to 17
ANNOTATION
Rafael Palma was a member of the Philippine Commission and was later elected Senator and
ultimately appointed as the fourth President of the University of the Philippines. Teodoro M. Kalaw was a
nationalist scholar, legislator, journalist, educator, and historian. The two authors were very active as
political leaders and officials of the government during the American period. This excerpt provides an
authoritative account of the evolution of the two dominant parties during the American period. It provides
clear insights and details on why the respective political parties were organized including the discussion
of their political platforms.
It was the inauguration of the First Philippine Assembly in 1907 that paved the way for the
country’s independence from American rule as it provided the Filipino legislators to have hands-on
experience in the local political affairs. This event was very significant in the history of Philippine politics
since this event also witnessed the first national election in our country through popular votes. The
Filipinos’ aspirations for greater political participation and their thirst for self-rule were realized in the
establishment of the Philippine legislature. This glorious victory of the Filipinos was accompanied by
enormous responsibilities because they have to prove to the U.S Congress, the international community,
and to the Filipino nation that the Filipinos could govern themselves properly and dutifully.
THE FEDERAL PARTY IS ORGANIZED
Since the beginning of the Filipino American War there had been a small group of
Filipinos who were opposed to it. These remained in Manila since the commencement of
hostilities and did not take part in the risk of the campaign, some of them believing in good faith
that it was a mistake and that it was foolish to fight against forces a hundred times superior. From
among these Filipinos the Commission recruited its followers and advisers. Later on, some of the
politicians who had been followers of Aguinaldo, and had taken refuge in the amnesty
proclamation, joined this small nucleus, perhaps because they were convinced that to continue
resistance would merely weaken the country materially and economically, and that it was more
prudent because of pressure of circumstances, to temporarily renounce the political ideal that
they had espoused. With the Filipino troop dispersed and the consequent surrender of many of
their generals; with the first acts of the Commission that bore signs of democracy and the desire
to count with public opinion in the making of the laws; with the reelection of McKinley that
assured the continuance of his policy for another four years, and, lastly, with the proclamation of
General McArthur threatening the Filipinos in arms with a series of cruel and severe penalties the
group of conservative Filipino saw that the time had come to act, and they organized a political
party under the name of Federal Party. The principal object of the
165
party was to hasten general peace in all the provinces and then to establish a territorial
government which in time would make possible the admission of the Islands as a State of the
North American Union. It was with unfeigned satisfaction that the Commission welcomed the
organization of this party. It was not only a clear proof that their reassuring reports to
Washington were founded on fact; it made it easier for them besides to carry out their plan of
retaining the Islands indefinitely. The possibility of making the Islands a state of the American
union was a hand some pretext with which to drive away the idea of independence so deeply
imbedded in the minds of the Filipinos. It was for this reason that the Commission lent most
cordial and decided support to the Federal Party and its dignitaries, and it placed at their disposal
all the facilities and means available under a state of actual war with which to carry out their
propaganda ends. In the Commission’s phraseology, the Federal Party spread thru out the Islands
with lightning like rapidity; but it spread not on account of the principles it stood for, but rather
because of the spoils and benefits that it might be able to divide among those enlisting in its
ranks. The hardships of the military rule under which many families were groaning, coupled with
the enticing offers of honors and recompense from the government coffers, was the magnificent
combination that had the effect of greatly weakening the resistance of the most valiant exponents
of independence. The Federal Party was victorious all along the lines and rightly could it boast at
the time of its easy conquests. It had with it the cream and the flower of plutocracy and the
country’s aristocracy of talent, at the same time that it enjoyed unlimited power, confidence, and
influence in the councils of the new government.
Without losing time, the Commission organized the municipal governments, and soon
afterwards the provincial governments. This furnished the occasion for a triumphal trip of the
Commission from one province to another, familiarizing themselves with men and things, mixing
socially with the Filipinos, informing them of the Commission’s benevolent mission and
promising them, like kindly guardians, a greater degree of popular government if they would
conduct themselves as became good wards. 6
The lesson, however, was not mastered so easily by such provinces as Cavite, Batangas, Cebu,
and Samar where the civil governments had to be turned over to the military; but on the whole it
can be said that the rest of the provinces behaved in the manner expected of them. Hence it was
that the Commission, complying with its mission of peace, organized the central civil
government on July 4, 1901, in spite of the intrigues of the military who would not relinquish
hold of the government so easily in favor of others.
Page 19 to 23
THE NATIONALISTS APPEAR ON THE SCENE
166
About the time, when Taft was absent in Rome, the Nationalists, who had until then kept
silent but had been observing with grief the course that events had taken, began to feel the first
qualms of conscience and they decided to take soundings to see whether the stream could be
forded. A number of “consistents,” as they styled themselves, met, deliberated, and drew up,
without delay, a program containing the following bases:
ESSENTIAL BASE
First'— The securing of the independence of the Islands thru lawful means.
INCIDENTAL BASES
Second. Modification of the present administration of the Philippines so as to give the Filipinos a
greater degree of self government, as an announcement of the capacity of the Filipino people.
Third. —Modification of article seven of the Philippine Bill as follows: (a) Immediate
establishment of two legislative chamber upon the completion of the Census.
(b) Both these legislative chambers to be elected by popular suffrage, to safeguard the interests
of the Filipino people, and to be patterned after the two Houses of Congress in America.
(c) The bills passed by the Philippine Legislature to become laws subject to the same rules set
forth in the American Constitution.
Fourth. —Admission of Philippine products into the United States customs free. Fifth .
Protective legislation for the Philippine industries. A committee of three was appointed to lay
this program before Governor Wright, who was acting in the absence of Mr. Taft. It is said that
Governor Wright, upon learning the purpose of the committee, knitted his brow in displeasure
and flatly refused to give his assent to the program. Although aggrieved by Governor Wright’s
reception, the Nacionalistas were not discouraged, and when Mr. Taft arrived they named another
committee to see him. Mr. Taft was more diplomatic as to form than Mr. Wright, but was just as
unyielding as to substance.
In his opinion, the propaganda of the Nacionalista party would stir up the fires of the
insurrection anew and would kill the party itself. It would be impossible to prevent the
authorities from suspecting the Nationalists from within and confusing them with the brigands
out in the field. Along similar lines, Mr. Taft addressed the committee. He took care to suggest,
however, that if the word “independence” were eliminated from the program, he would have no
objection to recognizing the new
party. Debates and doubts ensued among the organizers of the party, but in the end the opinion
prevailed that the grapes were still green and must be allowed to ripen; they, therefore, retreated
to their original position of watchful waiting. It was
167
impossible, however, for the Federalists’ error to continue blindfolding the country for any
length of time. The Saint Louis Exposition of 1904 which induced many Filipinos to visit the
United States, gave the Federal Party a lesson which it would not even admit when Mabini made
them see the impossibility of their platform.
There was not a single American who seriously favored the annexation of the
Philippines. To them, such annexation was precluded by the distance of the Islands and by the
customs of the Filipinos that were totally different. Many of the prominent “Federalists” who had
gone to the United States in the honest belief that
their platform had some merit to it, came back confused and disheartened. The panacea they had
administered on the country was a fatal one, and could not cure it, so that the party found itself in
a very embarrassing position which not even the changes, subsequently adopted, were able to
remedy.
The Nacionalistas took advantage of the opportunity and came out in the open. The state
of war that had silenced them there tofore and prevented the carrying out of any propaganda for
the party, had ceased to exist. There was nothing in the organic law prohibiting their working in a
peaceful manner for the independence of the country. The Census had been completed and two
years later the elections for the first Philippine Assembly was to be held. Herein we have to do
justice to the American people. The liberal spirt of their Constitution which allows no barriers to
free thought and its free expression, had made it possible for the Filipinos to campaign
peacefully for their independence and to provide the ways and means necessary to obtain it. No
other people has permitted a similar liberty to the inhabitants of a territory under its sway. Thus it
was that the Nacionalistas, in organizing their party, never lost sight of, nor have they ever failed
to recognize, this generosity on the part of the American people and their representatives in the
Islands. Thus it was also that the leaders of the Nacionalistas never have shown an attitude of
arrogance or of challenge even in the most trying situations, but instead they have placed
themselves in the position of one merely complying with a duty dictated by the voice of the
people. They considered themselves as trustees of the ideals of the Revolution, who were in duty
bound to continue the works of those who had fallen.
In all their campaigns they limited themselves to showing to the American people and their
representatives here that the cause of independence had not ceased to have followers in the
country, and that, in spite of the personal liberties grant the Filipinos and the participation given
them in the different branches of the government, they still cherished the ambition to have their
own nationality and their own government under their own laws. In no manner were they
impeded by the Government in their organization, but while there were no impediments from
that end, there were many when the time arrived for the heads of the organization to come to an
understanding. Because of this lack of understanding the Nacionalistas
168
became divided into various groups, the dividing line between each of which they themselves
were unable to delineate. They lost much time discussing the clauses and planks of their
respective platforms, until, on the eve of the election, the apprehension of a common disaster
made them reunite, but only temporarily, because after their victory at the polls they fell to
disputing again among themselves.
169
Excerpt from Harrison, Francis Burton. The Corner-Stone of Philippine Independence.
New York: The Century Co., 1922. pp 60 – 74
ANNOTATION
Francis Burton Harrison (1873-1957) was a lawyer educated at Yale and the New York Law
School. As a Democrat representing the State of New York, he was a U.S. congressman from 1903 to
1905 and from 1907 to 1912, and in 1916 President Woodrow Wilson appointed him Governor-General of
the Philippines. As a fervent anti-imperialist and opponent of “Dollar Diplomacy,” Harrison speeded up
the filipinization of civil service posts, introduced reforms toward self-government, and espoused the
Democrat program to give early independence to the Philippines. The Democrats lost in the elections of
1920, but Harrison returned to Manila in 1935 to serve as a presidential adviser to President Manuel L.
Quezon under the Philippine Commonwealth. He was also an adviser to the Philippine government-in
exile during World War II, as well as to Presidents Manuel Roxas, Elpidio Quirino, and Ramon
Magsaysay. At his request, Harrison was buried in the Philippines.
The excerpt depicts the personal view of Harrison on the Filipino leaders and politicians who
were emerging as the new leaders of the government. His descriptions of his relationships with the leaders
and their ways offer a firsthand version of the evolution of the political control and influence of members
of the Philippine Assembly. This selection also shows his thoughts on the role and challenges he faced as
the Governor-General of the Philippines.
CHAPTER V
Filipinos in Control of Legislature
It is not my intention to write here a history of the Philippine Government during the past
eight years. As a participant in the work of that administration I could not, in all probability,
write impartially of it. The records are all there, and it is too soon to pronounce final judgment.
Those of us who have been connected with the administration have many times given public
expression to our purposes and public record to our explanations. Most of it is already embalmed
in the mortuary of government reports on file in Washington and Manila.
Some Filipino historian in the years to come will probably, from the angle of vision afforded
those who come after us, go through the musty records of the past, and give to this period a few
chapters in a history of the Philippines. My hope is that in this volume I may contribute
something of interest to the world-wide discussion concerning the capacity of the tropical races
for self-government, as observed by one who has been engaged in giving to the Filipinos the
fullest possible opportunity to demonstrate such capacity. If for this purpose government records
and statistics are quoted, it will be in the endeavor to show to what an extent the Philippines have
developed politically, economically, and otherwise materially, under their
own government. (60)
170
It is impossible, however, to avoid frequent reference to the governor-general and his
relation to the general situation ; his position is by tradition the very nerve-center of Philippine
administration, and he is given by law very full powers of supervision and control. It was one of
my purposes to assign gradually to the proper functionaries the responsibilities which should be
theirs. The Governor-General of the Philippines receives a salary of $18,000 a year from the
Insular Treasury, and the residence known as Malacañang Palace in Manila is set aside for his
use. The salary had been $21,000, but was reduced, at my insistence and against the wishes of
members of the Legislature, during my first weeks of office, when for reasons of vitally
necessary economy other salaries were being cut. The salaries of the Governor of Hong-Kong
and the Governor-General of Java are about three times as high ; of the Governor General of
British India about four or five times as much. It costs the Governor-General of the Philippines
from twice to four times his salary to live in Malacañang, according to his disposition in the
matters of entertaining and general style of living. No motor-car is furnished him, and no
servants, but he has free light and water and a cottage allowed him in the mountains in Baguio,
known as the Mansion House. Free music is provided for entertainments in Manila, furnished by
the Constabulary Band. Before leaving I was instrumental in arranging that the appropriation bill
should provide for the ''entertainment of distinguished guests" out of the $100,000 appropriated
in the General Purpose funds, when "approved by the Council of State."
This should lighten the financial (61)
burden of my successor. It was made use of once in my last few months of office to the amount
of about $3000, to pay for the extraordinary expenditures necessary for entertainment at
Malacañang of the visitors who were members of the Congressional party. Malacañang Palace is
one of the most comfortable and delightful homes in the tropics. The Spaniards were the best of
all the European races as builders in the hot countries, perhaps because they learned how to
build in their own. The English make themselves miserable in the tropics by reproducing in
every respect possible the houses and methods of life of their own cold climate. Malacañang was
originally purchased by the Spanish Government about a century ago as a casita or country
house, and has been added to from time to time until it has now a huge floor space of old
hand-hewn hardwood, and is admirably fitted for large entertainments. The balcony projects over
the swiftly flowing Pasig River, and there is generally a pleasant breeze there, even during the
hottest weather. The thermometer in my room generally stood at 83°, and seldom went below 76°
or above 89°. The gardens along the river are noted for the fairy-land illumination displayed at
evening entertainments. Malacañang has been greatly enlarged and modernized in the last few
years, and a beautiful new executive office building in the garden has just been completed. In the
disastrous earthquake of 1865 the big stone palace of the governor-general, on what is now Plaza
McKinley, was totally destroyed, and the governor-general moved temporarily into Malacañang;
like so much else that the Spanish intended as temporary, it has become his permanent residence.
When I settled (62)in Malacañang I was the ninety-fifth governor-general, and served in that
position for seven and a half years, or longer than any one of the forty-four who had directly
preceded me, dating back to the eighteenth century. The governor-general has an office in
Malacañang, but when he was also President of the Philippine Commission, which
171
sat daily during the Legislative sessions, it was customary for him to go to the Ayuntamiento, or
City Hall, every day for his office work.
It was frequently charged that in my first months of office I would not consult with "the
Americans"; so far as I am aware, I saw all Americans who wished to advise with me,—indeed,
gave hours to that service, day after day, year after year. The real difficulty was that I did not
always take the advice, not of “the Americans," but of certain Americans who had composed
what had been popularly known as the "kitchen cabinet," or "polo cabinet" of recent years.
Few of them held official positions, and many of them seemed to me to be inspired by private
financial interests rather than the public interest. Anyone who has ever held public executive
office will know how very great a part of his time is occupied in seeing people and receiving
advice. This is particularly so in the Philippines, where for ages a paternal government had been
conducted, with the governor-general, whether by law or custom, the head and center of it all.
Week after week my time was occupied with receiving complaints, advice, or requests, often
from the same people again and again. Finally I came to feel that my office was not unlike that of
a medical man : persons came to me only when in trouble, and for consultation and relief. (63)
At the very beginning I made of record the fact that I had come to govern the islands in
consultation also with the Filipinos. I was thus brought into immediate and daily contact with
Mr. Sergio Osmena, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, president of the Nacionalista
party and the leading representative of the Filipino people. This remarkable man had already
been Speaker for five years, and still holds that office. I found him extremely well informed, not
only about Philippine affairs, but about American history and Constitutional law. Wise, astute,
and cautious, of an impressive personality, he was also possessed of most remarkable courteous
good manners, which never failed him. For the past thirteen years he and Mr. Quezon have been
the dominant personalities in Philippine politics. I have never heard either of them speak a word
of criticism or ill-will against the United States or the American people, and only very rarely
against an individual American. They have always had a faith in our country and an appreciation
of what our country has done for their people far above the p e t t y l e v e l o f political and
racial feelings in Manila.
Our first duty was to select for recommendation to the President the names of the new
Filipino majority in the commission which was promised by his message. Mr. Osmena furnished
a list of a dozen names, and we proposed to submit them for approval to the Philippine
Assembly, so that all the elected representatives of the people might have a share in the selection,
but this plan was vetoed by the Secretary of War. I then consulted Chief Justice Arellano,
Resident Commissioners Quezon and Earnshaw, and Colonel Harbord, (65)
Chief of Constabulary. The five names agreed upon were cabled to the Secretary of War, and the
commissioners were shortly nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate, as follows:
Victorino Mapa of Iloilo as Secretary of Finance and Justice; Rafael Palma of Manila, for several
years already a member of the commission, for reappointment; Vicente Ilustre of
172
Batangas ; Jaime de Veyra of Leyte and Vicente Singson-Encarnacion of Ilocos Sur. Palma and
De Veyra were members of the Nacionalista party, Mapa sympathetically inclined to that party,
Ilustre an independent, and Singson the leader of the Progresista party in the House of
Representatives. For nearly three years, until the change of government under the Jones Act, we
worked. Together through seasons of political excitement and turmoil with perfect harmony and
mutual good-will. It may serve to illustrate the types of older Filipino leaders to describe these
commissioners here.
Secretary Mapa, who sat for twelve years upon the Philippine Supreme Court bench, is short of
stature and dignified in demeanor. He served in Spanish days as Alcalde (or Mayor) of the City
of Iloilo. His courtesy and modesty are so great that none but his intimate friends know his rare
sense of humor and fund of anecdotes and proverbs. Some of his best stories are of playing
tresillo (cards) with Governor-General Weyler, who was a short man like himself, with a terrific
military reputation and menacing gestures; Mr. Mapa incidentally points out that General Weyler
in all his long life had never once been under fire himself. As a member of the commission, Mr.
Mapa's services were invaluable; nobody in the islands has a better (66)
legal mind, and he was constantly appealed to by hisbcolleagues for his opinion on all legal
points, never offering his advice in general discussions until it was asked. He was generous and
kindly always, but in a parliamentary fight, once he had made up his mind, he was absolutely
fearless, a veritable little Lion of Justice. His face is like an engraving of a French statesman of
the seventeenth century, and his sense of honor and fair play are above all party or political
considerations. He was recently made Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, to succeed the late
Chief Justice Cavetona Arellano, but had to resign his position before a year of incumbency, on
account of ill-health.
Rafael Palma is generally considered the third man in Filipino politics. His somewhat severe and
melancholy face frequently lights up with an unexpected and sunny smile, as his sense of humor
is pronounced. He has a good legal mind, rare literary ability, and a talent for public speaking ;
and he speaks in the choicest Spanish. He is modest and industrious, and a loyal party man, upon
whom a large part of the burden of party management was placed by Speaker Osmena. His
service in the House of Representatives, the commission, the Philippine Senate, and on the Board
of Regents of the University of the Philippines has been marked by absolute integrity and by a
devotion to the cause of public instruction. As Secretary of the Interior he handled successfully
many of the most delicate problems of the Government. Just and fair, he is popular with
Americans and Filipinos alike. Being a very poor man, he has recently retired from the cabinet to
enter business, as he has, in the Filipino fashion, a large and growing family. (67)
Jaime de Veyra was governor of the great province of Leyte during the troublesome days of the
uprising of the pulajans, or outlaws, about fifteen years ago. His literary ability is marked, and
illuminates his reports and papers, as he served an apprenticeship as a newspaper editor. He has
held office in the House of Representatives and the commission and as Secretary of Commerce
and Police, and then as Executive Secretary of the Government. His charming wife is a great
173
asset to him, with her facility for making and keeping friends among the American
Congressional ladies, since Don Jaime is now one of the two Representatives in Congress from
the Philippines. He is of a thick-set figure, somewhat darker than his colleagues, and of a very
serious turn of mind, rarely smiling or talking except when he has something to say, when he
develops a rather unexpected eloquence. He is extremely tender-hearted and inclined to
sentiment. Vicente Illustre has dark and handsome features, and is possessed of much dignity and
grace of manner. He served as a member of the Revolutionary Junta in Hong-Kong during the
insurrection, and since then has practised law and watched over his sugar plantations in
Batangas. He came from private life to the commission, where he did arduous and valuable work
in drafting the laws for the reformation of the Justice of the Peace service, and also the new code
for the government of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu, in 1914. He, like Mr. Mapa and
Mr. Singson, has considerable wealth, and lives in a luxurious home surrounded with all
comforts and with works of art. Mr. Ilustre was always something of an insurrecto in politics,
and though he gained a seat for the short term in the Sen- (67)
ate, in 1916, he was ousted by his opponent in 1918 and has since practised law. He is rather
more suspicious of the intentions of the United States than are his colleagues, and is aggressively
in favor of the immediate independence of his country. His education was completed in Madrid
in the later days of Spanish domination, and he has imbibed there some of the old-world
cynicism as to the promises and agreements of nations. Vicente Singson is a tall, slow
moving figure of the mestizo type. He is an able public speaker, and has served in the House of
Representatives, the commission, and the Senate. He is a Conservative and his interests are
largely those of business and finance. Humor seldom disturbs his dignity, but his manners are
affability and courtesy personified. His talents are those of the world of commerce, rather than of
legislative halls, but he is ready and able to advance his views and defend his opinions on all
occasions. His presence strengthened the business side of the commission.
Like Mr. Palma, he has been to the United States twice, and seems to like American
customs and ideas. I find on reading over these descriptive sketches of my first Filipino
colleagues that I have stressed the dignity of them all ; they are all of the older type and
generation, and of them only Mr. Palma speaks English readily ; none have had an American
public-school education. Dignity of demeanor is essentially an Oriental characteristic,—dignity
with an impassive tinge. In the expression of most of the older Filipinos there is a trace of
melancholy, as there is in all the Filipino music of older days,—the mark of centuries of service
as a subject race. Men of the younger genera- (68)tion, already coming upon the stage in
business and public affairs, look full of hope, ambition, and American hustle. U p o n f i r s t
acquaintance, Americans are not aware of the sense of fun of the Filipinos; their solemnity is an
affair of manner rather than of mind. I remember several meetings of the all-Filipino Council of
State in which the bursts of laughter must have disconcerted the officials on the other side of the
swing doors. Loyal friends, good companions, dependable
advisers—I regret leaving them all In public affairs I found them ever conscientious and
patriotic, with a fine sense of the respect owed the United States Government, and a due
174
consciousness of obligation to their own people. Never was an anti-American measure
introduced intentionally. They realized that the Filipinos were on trial, and that they themselves
were the representatives of their fellow countrymen before the world. Hardly a possible problem
of government but came before the commission or the Council of State during these years. I
found them in debate, and in the care with which they cast their votes, as full of responsibility
and of intelligent understanding as any legislators I have known anywhere.
Those departments of government which they had never possessed before, and which
were therefore new to them, were studied with the utmost care and deliberation. In later chapters
I shall discuss the development of Filipino governmental abilities. Within a few months the
membership of the Philippine Commission was completed by President Wilson, and there arrived
from the United States the new American members,—Vice-Governor Henderson S. Martin, a
progressive Democrat from Kansas, genial and sunny-tempered, with a decided leaning toward
all liberal and democratic ideas; Winfred T. Denison, Secretary of the Interior, sensitive and
high-minded, one of the Progressive Republicans from New York, loyally devoted to the
principle of Filipino self-government; and Clinton L. Riggs of Baltimore, Secretary of
Commerce and Police, a Democrat of the most conservative type, whose bias in favor of the
generally accepted standards of colonial government soon earned for him among the resident
Americans the nickname of "the White Hope."
General Riggs was a most charming social companion, and a most difficult colleague in
government. He was, from the very beginning, out of sympathy with the new policy in the
Philippines, and, I think, came out with the idea of replacing me when my removal was
accomplished by the campaign then under way. He was closely in the confidence of the Secretary
of War, who also was greatly disturbed at the reports coming from the Philippines ; and although
Secretary Garrison subsequently became disgusted with the misinformation about the Philippines
which was being disseminated through the United States, and in a spirit of generous indignation
entered into a sharp controversy with Mr. Taft in the public press in defense ofmy administration,
I am sure he would, himself, say that he never really sympathized with our radical plans in the
Philippines; indeed, it will be remembered that his resignation as Secretary of War was based
partly upon his dissatisfaction with the speedy preparations for Philippine independence. General
Riggs stood firmly upon his interpretation of the law which gave the governor-general only
"supervision" of the (70)other department secretaries; he told me that "supervision" gave only an
advisory power, and no right of interference in his d e p a r t m e n t , which included the
Philippine Constabulary, of which by law the governor-general was commander-in-chief. The
Jones Act of 1916 cleared up this controversy by giving the governor general " supervision and
control" over all departments of government. During the eighteen months of our controversy,
General Riggs and I, after the fashion of Anglo-Saxons, managed to remain, personally and
socially, good friends. He went home ill in the summer of 1915, and his resignation was accepted
by the President in December of that year.
Poor Denison was the official who suffered most from the troublesome political storms of those
early days; his was a spontaneous, frank, and sincere nature, and he was genuinely inspired with
175
a desire to bring self-government to the Filipinos. He was not of the stern stuff necessary to face
public criticism and abuse. Within his first few months he made a speech at the City Club in
Manila in which he advocated giving the Filipinos their rights, or, as he phrased it, "give them
what they want.” He at once became the target for a veritable bombardment of ridicule and abuse
from the "organization," and his spirit was completely shattered. He left the Philippines a year
later, in a most melancholy frame of mind, absolutely broken on the wheel of the "organization's"
criticism.
Vice-Governor Martin, of a serene and well-balanceddisposition, rode the waves successfully
and rendered excellent service in the commission. His chief work was in the public schools, in
founding the Rural Credit Association system, and in drafting and forcing (71)through the
charter of the Philippine National Bank. He resigned in the autumn of 1916, and I think has since
regretted that he did not remain to carry on the work he liked so well. He was a valuable and
much valued pillar of support in our Philippine policy. He was succeeded in June, 1917, by
Vice-Governor Charles E. Yeater of Missouri, at the present writing acting Governor-General of
the Philippines.
To the Filipinos, the majority upon the commission meant that the dead-lock as to
appropriations and other important measures would be broken instantaneously, and that in the
selection of their higher officials, such as bureau chiefs, and judges of the First Instance, they
were to have the controlling vote in the commission, to which, by existing law, such nominations
were sent for confirmation. Long-standing grievances which they wished to remove were now in
their hands for settlement. Above all, the new policy was a recognition of their political rights
and race dignity, for which they showed immediate gratitude.
The morning after the announcement of the new step forward, "La Vanguardia,” the
leading Filipino paper, theretofore a very resolute opponent of American policies in the islands,
expressed in Spanish the general sentiment editorially under the heading
"Dawn of the New Era" as follows:
Magical Effect of President's Grave and Dignified Message . . .
Complete Disappearance of All Hitherto Existing Prejudices and a Great Improvement
in Political Atmosphere.
Much has already been said and written in regard to the necessity of a better understanding, of
harmony and cooperation, but, hitherto, results have been always negative and all (72)efforts
seemed fruitless. Matters went from bad to worse. Now, however, it has been sufficient for the
chosen representative of President Wilson to make a simple and frank statement of policy, and
the situation as a result is completely changed. These statements have been sufficient to revive in
a most admirable and complete manner the faith of Filipinos in the justice of the American
people, and all prejudices and misunderstandings that have grown up in the past have
176
been immediately wiped away. As a result, it can be said that since the decided views of the
Democratic Administration have been announced never before in our mutual history have respect
and consideration of American sovereignty been as firmly rooted in these islands as it is now.
The editor of the "Vanguardia," Mr. Alejandro Roces, the most influential and independent daily
publisher in the islands, maintained the same attitude unswervingly during my whole
administration. His unselfish patriotism and determined freedom from any official connections
lent weight to his opinions.
Upon the day after the delivery of the first message to the Legislature—October 16, 1913—the
Philippine Assembly gave official expression to similar views in a resolution, reciting the firm
stand of the Filipino people for immediate independence from the day of the insurrection against
Spain in 1896, through all trials and vicissitudes, and their patient confidence that ultimately the
United States Government would redress ''all errors and injustices." T h e r e s o l u t i o n
concluded as follows
We believe that, happily, the experiments of imperialism have come to an end, and that colonial
exploitation has passed into history. The epoch of mistrust has been closed. ... A few days have
sufficed to bring about a good understanding between Americans and Filipinos, which it had
been impossible to establish during the thirteen years past. We are convinced that every onward
step, while relieving the American Government of its responsibilities in the Islands, will, as in
the past, fully demonstrate the present capacity of the Filipino people to establish a
government of its own and guarantee in a permanent manner the safety under such government
of the life, property and liberty of the residents of the Islands, national as well as foreign. We do
not wish to say by this that there will not be difficulties and embarrassments. Nor do we even
expect that the campaign, open or concealed, of the enemies of the Filipino cause will cease
soon, but we feel sure that through a conservative use of the powers entrusted to us, the Filipino
people will, with God's favor and the help of America, emerge triumphantly from the test
however difficult it may be. A few days later, when the Filipino majority was appointed to the
commission, the new commissioners cabled their thanks to the President, accepting the offices in
order to “aid the work of laying down a basis for a stable, free Filipino Government." A joint
meeting of the Legislature on October 31, 1913, resolved “that the principle of immediate action
has taken the place of the announcement of promises." These quotations have been given not
only to show the response of the Filipino mind to the new policy, but for the light they cast upon
past history in the islands. For a century at least the home government, first of Spain and then of
the United States, had, in moments of liberal impulse, promised reforms and made political
professions, and then turned to other matters and left the field to the forces of reaction and
inaction.
