32
TOPIC 2: 16TH-18thCENTURY PHILIPPINES
List of Reading Materials:
1. Customs of the Tagalogs
2. Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reinos de las Indias
3. Historia de los Padres Dominicos en las Islas Filipinas y en sus Misiones del Japon, China,
Tung-kin y Formosa
4. Historia General de Filipinas: Conquistas espirituales y temporales de estos españoles dominios,
establecimientos progresos, y decadencias
5. Relacion de las Islas Filipinas
6. Relacion de las Islas Filipinas
7. Practica del Ministerio
8. Conspiracy Against the Spaniards (1588)
9. Insurrections by Filipinos in the Seventeenth Century
10. La Democracia
33
INTRODUCTION FOR 16TH-18THCENTURY PHILIPPINES
Jose Rhommel B. Hernandez, Ph.D.
The 16thto the 18thcenturies under Spain are hereby encapsulated in ten excerpts coming from
various documents written by Spaniards. The theme of the readings focus mainly on the situation
of the Filipinos from the time of the early encounter until their actions towards the end of the 18th
century which gave way to the different developments of the 19th. Although written by Spanish
missionaries, the contents show the daily life and culture of the Filipinos during the Spanish
colonial period.
The first is an excerpt of the Plasencia’s Costumbres de los Tagalos which describe the different
facets Tagalog everyday life. This is followed by a summarized translation of the laws regarding
the method of Reducción used in the New World and the Philippines. The third excerpt is a
description made by Dominican missionaries on the Aetas in different parts of Luzon. This
shows a general impression which could be duplicated as to how Filipinos were perceived by the
Spaniards. The fourth excerpt is a brief account/anecdote on the conversion of Filipinos to
Christianity. Readings five and six are from the Jesuit Pedro Chirino speaking about the daily life
of the Tagalogs and their language. These show the efforts of the Spanish missionaries to
understand the Filipinos and the complexity of the Filipinos’ culture and society.
Reading seven is from the Practica del Ministerio of Tomas Ortiz describing some basic tenets of
the prehispanic Philippine religion. The description shows the dynamics the conversion to
Christianity as well as the everyday life of Filipinos engaging the missionaries. Readings eight,
nine and ten are accounts of three rebellions starting among the datus of Tondo, to the rebellions
of Tamblot and Bankaw in the Visayas until the Agricultural Revolt of 1745.
34
Customs of the Tagalogs
Juan de Plasencia is a Franciscan friar who ministered in the Philippines from 1578 until
his death in around 1590. Originally from Plasencia in Extremadura Spain, he is
acknowledged as the founder of numerous towns in Luzon using the method of reducción.
He also authored books on language and the famous Doctrina Cristiana published
posthumously in 1593 and is the first book printed in the Philippines. The following is an
excerpt of his long ethnography on the Tagalogs having been assigned in the Tagalog
provinces of Bulacan, Laguna, Morong (Rizal) and Tayabas (Quezon). The reading
discusses the social, political, economic and cultural setup of the Tagalogs at the period of
early contact with the Spaniards. Plasencia documented the different social classes and
their particular functions in the early Philippine society.
Excerpt:
This people always had chiefs, called by them datos, who governed them and were
captains in their wars, and whom they obeyed and reverenced. The subject who committed any
offense against them, or spoke but a word to their wives and children, was severely punished.
These Chiefs ruled over but few people; sometimes as many as a hundred houses,
sometimes even less than thirty. This tribal gathering is called in Tagalo a barangay. It was
inferred that the reason for giving themselves this name arose from the fact (as they are classed,
by their language, among the Malay nations) that when they came to this land, the head of the
barangay, which is a boat, thus called became a dato. And so, even at the present day, it is
ascertained that this barangay in its origin was a family of parents and children, relations and
slaves. There are many of these barangays in each town, or, at least, on account of war, they did
not settle far from one another. They were not, however, subject to one another, except in
friendship and relationship. The chiefs, in their various wars, helped one another with their
respective barangays.
In addition to chiefs, who corresponded to our knights, there were three castes: nobles,
commoners and slaves. The nobles were the free-born whom they call maharlica. They did not
pay tax or tribute to the dato, but must accompany him in war, at their own expense. The chief
offered them beforehand a feast, and afterward they divided the spoils. Moreover, when the dato
went upon the water those whom he summoned rowed for him. If he built a house, they helped
him, and had to be fed for it. The same was true when the whole barangay went to clear up his
lands for tillage. The lands which they inhabited were divided among the whole barangay,
especially the irrigated portion, and thus each one knew his own. No one belonging to another
barangay would cultivate them unless after purchase or inheritance. The lands of the tingues, or
mountain ridges, are not divided, but owned in common by the barangay. Consequently, at the
time of the rice harvest, any individual of any particular barangay, although he may have come
35
from some other village, if he commences to clear any land may sow it, and no one can compel
him to abandon it. There are some villages, as for example, Pila de la Laguna, which these
nobles, or maharlicas, paid annually to the dato a hundred gantas of rice. The reason of this was
that, at the time of their settlement there, another chief occupied the lands, which the new chief,
upon his arrival, bought with his own gold; and therefore, the members of his barangay paid him
for the land, and he divided it, among those whom he saw fit to reward. But now, since the
advent of the Spaniards, it is not so divided.
The commoners are called aliping namamahay. They are married, and serve their master,
whether he be a dato or not, with half of their cultivated lands, as was agreed upon in the
beginning. They accompanied him whenever he went beyond the island, and rowed for him.
They live in their own houses, and are lords of their property and gold. Their children inherit it,
and enjoy their property and lands. The children, then, enjoy the rank of their father, and they
cannot be made slave (sa guiguilir) nor can either parents or children be sold. If they should fall
by inheritance into the hands of a son of their master who was going to dwell in another village,
they could not be taken from their own village and carried with him; but they would remain in
their native village, doing service there and cultivating the sowed lands.
The slaves are called aliping sa guiguilir. They serve their master in his house and on his
cultivated lands, and may be sold. The master grants them, should he see fit, and providing that
he has profited through their industry, a portion of their harvests, so that they may work
faithfully. For these reasons, servants who are born in the house of their master are rarely, if ever,
sold. That is the lot of captives in war, and of those brought up in the harvest fields.
36
Recopilación de Leyes de los Reinos de las Indias
The following is an English translation of the original Spanish legislations found in the
Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reinos de las Indias or the Laws of the Indies concerning the
establishment of the Reducciones. The Reducción is the process of transferring the natives
to a particular settlement. It was also used to designate the place where the settlement was
established. The Recopilacion is a compilation of the different laws promulgated by the
Queen or the King of Spain and were legislated to guide the Spaniards in the colonies as to
their behavior towards the natives. It was first released as a compilation in 1680 under
King Carlos II. The legislation below can be found in Book VI, Title III and provided
guidelines for the establishment of towns or pueblos. The copies of the laws were said to
have been provided and translated by Zelia Nuttall (1857-1933), an American
anthropologist specializing in Aztec-Mexican cultures. The legislations are of importance to
the Philippines since these are the same legislations used in the establishment of the towns
until the 19th century, immediately before the Revolution of 1896. It thus created a new
landscape besides the social and economic changes throughout the period of Spanish
colonization.
Excerpt:
On arriving at the locality where the new settlement is to be founded, the plan of the
place, with its squares, streets and building lots is to be outlined by means of measuring by cord
and ruler, beginning with the main square from which streets are to run to the gates and principal
roads and leaving sufficient open space so that even if the town grows it can always spread in a
symmetrical manner. Having thus laid out the chosen site the settlement is to be founded the
following form.
The chosen site shall be on an elevation; healthful; with means of fortification; fertile and
with plenty of land for farming and pasturage; fuel and timber; fresh water, a native population,
commodiousness; resources of convenient access and egress. It shall be open to the north wind.
If on the coast, care is to be taken that the sea does not lie to the south or west of the harbor. If
possible, the port is not to be near lagoons or marshes in which poisonous animals and corruption
of air and water breed.
In the case of a sea coast town, the main plaza is to be the starting point for the building of the
town, is to be situated near the landing place of the port. In inland towns the main plaza should
be in the center of the town and of an oblong shape, its length being equal to at least one and half
times its width, as this proportion is best for festivals in which horses are used and any other
celebrations which have to be held.
The size of the plaza shall be in proportion to the number of residents, heed being given
to the fact that towns of Indians, being new are bound to grow and it is intended that they shall
37
do so. Therefore, the plaza is to be planned with reference to the possible growth of the town. It
shall not be smaller than two hundred feet wide and three hundred feet long nor larger than eight
hundred feet long and three hundred feet wide. A well proportionated medium size plaza is not
six hundred feet long and four hundred feet wide.
From the plaza, the four principal streets are to diverge, one from the middle of each of
its sides and two streets are to meet at each of its corners. The four corners of the plaza are to
face the four points of the compass, because thus the streets diverging from the plaza will not be
directly exposed to the four principal winds, which could cause much inconvenience.
The whole plaza and the four main streets diverging from it shall have arcades, for these
are a great convenience for those who resort thither for trade. The eight streets which run into the
plaza at its four corners are to dos o freely without being obstructed by the arcades of the plaza.
These arcades are to end at the corners in such a way that the sidewalks of the streets can evenly
join those of the plaza.
In cold climates, the streets shall be wide; in hot climates narrow, however, for purposes
of defense and where horses are kept the streets had better be wide.
The other streets laid out consecutively around the plaza are to be so planned that even if
the town should increase considerably in size it would meet with no obstruction which might
disfigure what had already been built or be a detriment to the defense or convenience of the
town.
At certain distances in the town smaller, well proportion plazas are to be laid out on
which the main church, the parish church or monastery shall be built so that the teaching of
religious doctrine may be evenly distributed.
If the town lies on the coast, its main church shall be so situated that it may be visible
from the landing place and so built that its structure may serve as means of defense for the port
itself.
After the plaza and streets have been laid out building lots are to be designated, in the
first place, for the erection of the main church, the parish church or monastery and these are to
occupy respectively and entire block so that no other structure can be built next to them
excepting such as contribute to their commodiousness or beauty.
Immediately afterwards the place and site are to be assigned for the Royal and Town
Council House, the Custom House and Arsenal which is to be close to the church and port so that
in case of necessity one can protect the other. The hospital for the poor and sick of non
contagious diseases shall be built next to the church forming its cloister.
38
Historia de los Padres Dominicos en las Islas Filipinas y en sus Misiones del Japon, China,
Tung-kin y Formosa
The following excerpt is from the Noticias Preliminares (Preliminary Notes) of the six
volume work by the Dominicans Juan Ferrando and Joaquin Fonseca titled Historia de los
Padres Dominicos en las Islas Filipinas y en sus Misiones del Japon, China, Tung-kin y
Formosa published from 1870-1872. The section contains ethnographic descriptions of the
Spaniards in the Philippines, the Chinese migrants, the Mestizos, the lowland natives as
well as the different northern peoples like the Tinguians, Igorots and Ilongots. Also
included are the Negritos from the different parts of Luzon. The main author, Juan
Ferrando, O.P. arrived in the Philippines around 1842 and was assigned to Vigan as
companion to the Bishop Rafael Masoliver. He is described as more clear, concise and
methodic of the Dominican historians of the Philippines. Utilized in this excerpt were the
writings of historians like Diego Aduarte, O.P. and Francisco Antolin, O.P. He was able to
finish the Historia to include the events until the year 1840. His unpublished work was later
edited by Joaquin Fonseca, O.P. who added an appendix bringing the work down to the
year 1871. Below is a part of the English translation by Jose Rhommel B. Hernandez and
published in 1994 containing the description of the “Negros” and as later on labeled in the
text itself, the Aetas.
Excerpt:
Not only in Luzon, but also in the Visayas can be found the true oceanic blacks which form an
entirely different race from the rest known in the discovered world. In the Philippines, they are
known by the Spaniards as the “Negritos,” and by the natives, as Aetas, Itas, Etas, Balugas, etc.,
according to the provinces in whose surroundings they live. They are very likely the first
inhabitants of the country. In nothing are they similar to those of the Malay race in the divisions,
color, hair, customs and mode living. Even their dialect is distinct from that which the nations
coming from their caste speak. Many of the like those who go down to the towns speak the idiom
of the Indios. Many doubt if they have a proper idiom. In their dances, however, they sing in an
unintelligible manner and many seem to howl rather than sing. In their hair, not all are equals.
Some tribes have it somewhat straight, but they are generally curly, like those who come from
Africa, although not so dark. The color of the body is so dark, much more than that of the natives
of the Malay race. They have their mouths broader than the ordinary, and more distant from the
nose, which is small and grounded in some. Almost all have side burns and some have beard.
Their clothing is made of a miserable girdle which covers their shame. The women, when going
to the Christian towns cover their breasts with another piece of cloth made of cotton or valete
bark. They are of very limited intelligence, although in some can be discovered signs indicating
more than the regular talent, if they will be cultivated. Their race can be called as the ultimate of
the human species. Their physique has all the characters of a savage and degraded race. They
themselves have an idea so low of themselves that they say that they are not men nor people, but
39
Aetas. They live within the forests in the ranges of the west of Manila Bay, from Mariveles until
Pangasinan; in the slopes of one and another side, from that which crosses the island from the
east to west from San Fabian until Valer; to the west of some towns of Cagayan, and in the other
ranges from the Cape of Engaño until Tayabas; in the mountains of San Mateo and Camachin; in
some parts of the provinces of the South; in a word, they are in almost all the mountains of
Luzon, grouped in small tribes with relations between themselves, particularly the neighbors of a
same range. They do not have any dwelling other than bad huts under the trees and at time some
entangled branches to avoid in some way the effect of bad weather. Most of them sleep where the
night seizes them, and when they are cold, or the humidity is very great, they burn bonfires and
they turn themselves over on hot ashes. They are not dedicated to agriculture and are maintained
from wild roots, leaves of trees and cattles that by chance opens itself to an arrow shot. They
suffer much on rainy days, and days passed without them taking anything other than herb. For
the hunting of the wild boar, or wild hogs, they have some arrows whose iron points are held
with a cane by means of some strong small cords. The arrows are released to enter into the body
of the wild beast, which afterwards remains in the thickets and the hunter is easily freed from its
fangs, which is known to cause terrible wounds. Their government consists in leaving each one
in a more complete liberty, and in the observance of some practices inherited from their old one.
One of them is the eating in common large cattle gathered by some of them. There is no sign of
religion found among them, as they may not be some practices indicating their belief in the
immortality of the soul. Their matrimonies are solemnized with some brute feasts that do not
merit the hardship of being narrated. The essential ceremony consists in making an old woman
nod at those engaged, saying sometimes the following expressions: “Produce the man, produce
the woman”, very proper to designate the primary end of the marriage, in which they differ
hardly from the beasts. In some points they themselves go around burning notably, as happens in
the mountains of Bataan, an effect of the miserable life they live. They lack women, since the
Tagalog Indias hire many of them to their service. These women are mixed at times with the
Indios, and the Mestizos who are born from them do not have curly hair. There is someone
saying that their feature is better than that of the Tagalog.
Those who live in the surroundings of the Christian towns are voluntary slaves. For a little rice or
other trifle, they cross from great distance wax, wood, canes and reeds. All have their patrons,
who give them lodging when they go down to the towns. This benefit is not little favor
considering the disgust that is in their uncovered bodies, covered regularly from the hips and
groins. From the conversion of the natives of the islands which the missionaries began, they also
thought of converting the people of this degraded caste. But nobody until now has been able to
boast of have subjected and united a tribe for a long time to show them the civil and Christian
life.
40
Historia General de Filipinas: Conquistas espirituales y temporales de estos españoles
dominios, establecimientos progresos, y decadencias
Juan de la Concepcion is a Recollect missionary known for his monumental 14 volume
work Historia General de Filipinas: Conquistas espirituales y temporales de estos españoles
dominios, establecimientos progresos, y decadencias. The work was published from 1788 until
1792. The following excerpt narrates a certain Fray Rodrigo’s experience in working with
the Filipinos near Bagumbayan which was then a highly forested area. The brief anecdote
is a rich source of the possible transitions happening in the minds of the Filipinos in their
reception of Christianity.
Excerpt:
Father Fray Rodrigo was one day passing through a thicket. That thicket was, according
to their customs, one of the reserved ones, and it was considered sacrilegious to cut anything
from it, and that such act would be punished with immediate death. So infatuated were they with
that blindness that no one, even though in great need, dared to take anything from that place,
being restrained by fear. The Father saw a beautiful tree, which they call pajo, laden with ripe
fruit. He ordered his followers to gather some by climbing the tree. They strenuously resisted,
but Father Fray Rodrigo insisted on it. They declared that they would not do it under any
circumstances, and that it meant sure death if they offended the respect whose fatal sentence
comprehended all the trees of that place. The Father severely chided them for their error, and to
show them that it was so, he determined to gather fruit himself. He began to break branches and
to clear the trunk, in order to facilitate the ascent. The Indians were grieved, and urgently begged
him to desist from that undertaking which they considered as so rash. But the religious, arming
himself with the sign of the cross, and reciting the antiphon, Ecce lignum crucis, managed to
gather some of the ripe fruit, which the tree offered. He ate it in front of them and liked the fruit
very much, for indeed it is savory. They looked as his face amazed, expecting his instant death.
When that did not happen, they recognized their delusion and detested their cheats. They also ate
without experiencing any harm. The Father charged them to say nothing upon their arrival at the
village. He took with him a goodly quantity of that fruit and divided the great portion of it among
the chiefs. Esteeming the gift, they, in their ignorance, ate it without fear. In a sermon on the
following day, the Father disclosed the secret and checked their vain fears; so that, undeceived by
experience, they followed him with their axes, and in short order felled that thicket, which was a
confused center of perverse iniquities. Thereupon, many of those infidels submitted to the true
knowledge.
41
Relacion de las Islas Filipinas
The author of the following excerpts is the Jesuit Fr. Pedro Chirino. He first arrived in the
Philippines as a young priest in 1590 and was assigned to Balayan and later on to Taytay in
the following year 1591. He studied the Tagalog language and was one of the first
missionaries to deliver sermons in that language. His masterpiece is his Relacion de las
Islas Filipinas which was published in Rome in 1604. The two excerpts shows the status of
the Tagalogs in the early years of the Spanish contact particularly their everyday life and
language.
Excerpt:
The Filipinos are not so ceremonious in their actions as are the Chinese and Japanese; yet they
have their politeness and good breeding, especially the Tagalos, who are very civil and courteous
in word and action. Upon meeting one another, they practice our custom of uncovering the
head--not that they used hats, caps, or bonnets; but they wore a piece of cloth like a towel, some
three or four palmos long, which they wound around the head in becoming fashion, like the
ancient crowns or diadems. This they removed, as they now do the hat [sombrero]--which they
have adopted, in imitation of us, abandoning the potong, as they called the towel or diadem
which they formerly wore. As among them it is not courtesy to remain standing before a person
whom they respect, they seat themselves upon the ground, or rather on their heel-bones. Seated
in this way, with head uncovered and the potong thrown like a towel over the left shoulder, they
talk with their superiors. The mode of salutation upon entering or meeting anyone is as follows:
They draw the body together and make a low reverence, raising one or both hands to the face,
and placing them upon the cheeks; they next sit down waiting for the question that may be put to
them, for it is considered bad manners to speak before one is spoken to. Their greatest courtesy is
in their form of address; for they never speak to one as "thou," or in the second person, whether
singular or plural, but always use the third person, saying for example--"Does the lord, or the
chief, wish for this or that?" There are many examples of this to be found in Holy Scripture or
sacred language, and particularly in the Psalms. In the relations of man with woman, woman
with man, or woman with woman, they are very careful--even when they are quite equals, and,
too, among the middle class--to use, after every important word, nothing but "my Lord," or "my
Lady;" as, "My Lord, as I was coming up the river, I saw, my Lord," etc. This term and pronoun
are used as agreeable and even affectionate, even in the languages of much greater importance,
as Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which are the three most venerable tongues. In polite and
affectionate intercourse, they are very extravagant, addressing letters to each other in terms of
elaborate and delicate expressions of affection, and neat turns of thought. As a result of this, they
are much given to musical practice; and although the guitar that they use, called cutyapi, is not
very ingenious or rich in tone, it is by no means disagreeable, and to them is most pleasing. They
play it with such vivacity and skill that they seem to make human voices issue from its four
metallic cords. We also have it on good authority that by merely playing these instruments they
42
can, without opening their lips, communicate with one another, and make themselves perfectly
understood--a thing unknown of any other nation. The Bisayans are more rustic and less civil in
manners, just as their language is harsher and less polished. They have not so many terms of
courtesy, as formerly they had no letters until, a very few years ago, they borrowed theirs from
the Tagalos. As we have already treated of their languages, it would be advisable to make some
mention of their letters.
