135
Emilio Aguinaldo’s Proclamation of Surrender to the United States, April 19, 1901 23
With the arrival of American reinforcements in March 1899, the United States’ campaign against
the Filipinos quickly gained momentum in many parts of the Philippines. Elwell Otis, the US
Military Governor-General, order an intensive drive to the north with the aim of pursuing Emilio
Aguinaldo who originally established his government in Malolos, Bulacan. On November 12,
Tarlac, the last revolutionary capital, was captured by the Americans which signaled the collapse
of organized Filipino resistance. And with the fall of his top officials such as Mabini, Luna, and 24
del Pilar, Aguinaldo was forced to flee to the mountains to avoid capture. Eventually, with the
surrender of his personal messenger Cecilio Seguismundo and with the help of the Macabebes of
Pampanga, Aguinaldo was arrested by Colonel Frederick Funston in Palanan, Isabela on March
23, 1901.
Aguinaldo was brought to Manila where he released a proclamation stating his official surrender
to the United States on April 19. This was released by the office of Arthur MacArthur who
succeeded Otis as the Governor-General. According to proclamation, Aguinaldo had to concede
after he had chosen to heed the people’s call for peace. It could be remembered that several
members of Aguinaldo’s own government eventually sided with the Americans and began to
advocate for the annexation. At the end, he claimed that his official surrender was nevertheless a
service for the Philippines.
---------
Manila, P.I., April 19, 1901
The following address to the Filipino people is published for the information of all concerned. In
order to signalize such important step in the pacification of the country, one thousand prisoners
of war will, upon taking the oath of allegiance, be released and sent to their homes, for which
purpose the Provost Marshal General will give the necessary orders.
ARTHUR MACARTHUR
Major General, US Army and US Military Governor in the Philippines
Emilio F. Aguinaldo, “Address to the Filipino People: April 19, 1901,” accessed 25 October 23
2020, http://name.umdl.umich.edu/adt4867.0001.001.
Frank H. Golay, Face of the Empire: United States-Philippine Relations, 1898-1946 (Quezon 24
City: Ateneo de Manila University Press, 1997), p. 53.
136
TO THE FILIPINO PEOPLE:
I believe I am not in error in presuming that the unhappy fate to which my adverse fortune has
led me is not a surprise to those who have been familiar with the progress of the war. The lessons
taught with a full meaning and which have recently come to my knowledge suggest with
irresistible force that a complete termination of hostilities and lasting peace are not only
desirable, but absolutely essential to the welfare of the Philippine Islands.
The Filipinos have never been dismayed at their weakness, nor have they faltered in following
the path pointed out by their fortitude and courage. The time has come, however, in which they
find their advance along this path to be impeded by an irresistible force, which, while it restrains
them, yet enlightens their minds and opens to them another course, presenting them the cause of
peace. This cause has been joyfully embraced by the majority of my fellow-countrymen, who
have already united around the glorious sovereign banner of the United States. In this banner
they repose their trust, and believe that under its protection the Filipino people will attain all
those promised liberties which they are beginning to enjoy.
The country has declared unmistakably in favor of peace. So be it. There has been enough blood,
enough tears, and enough desolation. This wish cannot be ignored by the men still in arms if they
are animated by a desire to serve our noble people, which has thus clearly manifested its will. So
do I respect this will, now that it is known to me.
After mature deliberation, I resolutely proclaim to the world that I cannot refuse to heed the
voice of a people longing for peace, nor the lamentations of thousands of families yearning to see
their dear ones enjoying the liberty and the promised generosity of the great American Nation.
By acknowledging and accepting the sovereignty of the United States throughout the Philippine
Archipelago, as I now do, and without any reservation whatsoever, I believe that I am serving
thee, my beloved country. May happiness be thine!
EMILIO AGUINALDO
137
Benevolent Assimilation Proclamation by US Willam McKinley, December 21, 1898.
Retrieved from Blount, James. American Occupation of the Philippines, 1898-1912. (New
York & London: G.P. Putnamn’s Sons, 1913)
The Benevolent Assimilation Proclamation issued by President William McKinley on December
21, 1898, is among the primary sources collated by James Blount, an American volunteer and
district judge, during his sojourn in the Philippine archipelago in the early years of American
occupation in the Philippine Archipelago by the turn of the 20thcentury. The compilation of the
historical documents entitled American Occupation of the Philippines, 1898-1912 is considered
to be the culmination of Blount’s anti-imperialist advocacy. Aside from offering a first-hand
account of the Philippine American War and the early years of US colonization in the
Philippines, the book attempts to offer a balance account of the period from the perspective of
prominent figures in the Philippine-American War (such as George Dewey, Wesley Merritt,
Elwell Otis and Emilio Aguinaldo, to name a few), alongside Blount’s own interpretation to the
turn of events that had taken place. As to the chief implementer of the Benevolent Assimilation,
William McKinley was the 25th President of the United States of America who ran under the
banner of the Republican Party whose main policy then involved the expansion of the power and
influence of United States across the globe. The proclamation constitutes the official foreign
policy of the Executive Arm of the US government in accordance to their aim in espousing their
“Manifest Destiny” ideology and assuming the “white man’s burden” role as their ways and
means to justify their imperialist motives. Blount provided the historical background that led to
the issuance of the proclamation and offered a scathing take which labels the proclamation as the
“Pandora box of Philippine woes”.
THE BENEVOLENT ASSIMILATION PROCLAMAION
EXECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON,
December 21, 1898.
The destruction of the Spanish fleet in the harbor of Manila by the United States naval squadron
commanded by the United States naval squadron commanded by Rear-Admiral Dewey, followed
by the reduction of the city and the surrender of the Spanish forces, practically effected the
conquest of the Philippine Islands and the suspension of Spanish sovereignty therein. With the
signature of the treaty of peace between the United States and Spain by their respective
plenipotentiaries at Paris on the 10th instant, and as a result of the victories of American arms,
the future control, disposition, and government of the Philippine Islands are ceded to the United
States. In the fulfillment of the rights of sovereignty thus acquired and the responsible
obligations of government thus assumed, the actual occupation and administration of the entire
group of the Philippine Islands becomes immediately necessary, and he military government
heretofore maintained by the United States in the city, harbor, and bay of Manila is to be
extended with all possible dispatch to the whole of the ceded territory. In performing this duty to
the military commander of the United States is enjoined to make known to the inhabitants of the
138
Philippine Islands that in succeeding to the sovereignty of Spain, in severing the former political
relations, and in establishing a new political power, the authority of the United States is to be
exerted for the securing of the persons and property of the people of the islands and for the
confirmation of all their private rights and relations. It will be the duty of the commander of the
forces of occupation to announce and proclaim in the most public manner that we come not as
invaders or conquerors, but as friends, to protect the natives in their homes, in their
employments, and in their personal and religious rights. All persons who, either by active aid or
by honest submission, co-operate with the Government of the United States to give effect to
these beneficent purposes will receive the reward of its support and protection. All others will be
brought within the lawful rule we have assumed, with firmness if need be, but without severity,
so far as possible. Within the absolute domain of military authority, which necessarily is and
must remain supreme in the ceded territory until the legislation of the United States shall
otherwise provide, the municipal laws of the territory in respect to private rights and property and
the repression of crime are to be considered as continuing in force, and to be administered by the
ordinary tribunals, so far as practicable. The operations of civil and municipal government are to
be performed by officers as may accept the supremacy of the United States by taking the oath of
allegiance, or by officers chosen, as far as practicable, from the inhabitants of the islands. While
the control of all the public property and the revenues of the state passes with the cession, and
while he use and management of all public means of transportation are necessarily reserved to
the authority of the United States, private property, whether belonging to the individuals or
corporations, is to be respected except for cause duly established. The taxes and duties heretofore
payable by the inhabitants to the late government become payable to the authorities of the United
States unless it be seen fit to substitute for them other reasonable rates or modes of contribution
to the expenses of government, whether general or local. If private property be taken for military
use, it shall be paid for when possible in cash, at a fair valuation, and when payment in cash is
not practicable, receipts are to be given. All ports and places in the Philippine islands in the
actual possession of the land and naval forces of the United States will be opened to the
commerce of all friendly nations. All goods and wares no prohibited for military reasons by due
announcement of the military authority will be admitted upon payment of such duties and other
charges as shall be in force at the time of their importation. Finally, it should be the earnest wish
and paramount aim of the military administration to win the confidence, respect, and affection of
the inhabitants of the Philippines by assuring them in every possible way that full measure of
individual rights and liberties which is the heritage of free peoples, and by proving to them that
the mission of the United States is one of Benevolent Assimilation substituting the mild sway of
justice and right for arbitrary rule. In the fulfillment of this high mission, supporting the
temperate administration of affairs for the greatest good of the governed, there must be
sedulously maintained the strong arm of authority, to repress disturbance and to overcome all
obstacles to the bestowal of the blessings of good and stable government upon the people of the
Philippine Islands under the free flag of the United States.
WILLIAM MCKINLEY
139
Mariano Ponce’s Cartas Sobre la Revolucion
Cartas Sobre la Revolucion, 1897 1900 is a compilation of letters and correspondences of
Mariano Ponce to various revolutionaries – Filipinos and foreigners alike, from whom the former
had interacted and asked support for the First Philippine Republic during the turbulent turn of the
20th century. Born in Baliuag Bulacan on March 23,1863, Mariano Ponce is famous for being
part of the “triumvirate” of the Filipino propagandista movement, alongside with Marcelo Del
Pilar and Jose Rizal. In February 12, 1889, Ponce, together with Del Pilar and Graciano Lopez
Jaena established La Solidaridad wrote various articles using the pen names of Nanking,
Kalipulako and Tikbalang. Upon the establishment of the Hongkong Junta led by Emilio
Aguinaldo, Ponce was appointed as the official representative of the Philippine revolutionary
government to Japan for him to study the policy of Imperial Japan towards her relations to other
nations, and subsequently, to ask for military and financial support. In his letter to G. Apacible
dated in January 2, 1899, Ponce mentioned the negotiations being initiated for the acquisition of
ammunitions from Japan and some diplomatic arrangements, among the others. Ponce’s letter to
Apacible in 1899, together with the other correspondences compiled, provide an outline of the
conducts of the Philippine revolutionary government as far as diplomacy and international
relations were concerned, thus, tracing its early relations to Asian nations, notably Japan and the
reformist movement in China led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. One could also discern from Ponce’s letters
the emerging Asian solidarity in response to the Western intrusion in the region for the past
centuries. Cartas Sobre la Revolucion, 1897- 1900 is digitally housed in the The United States
and its Territories, 1870 – 1925: The Age of Imperialism collection of the University of
Michigan Library. Translation of the letters from Spanish to Filipino was undertaken by
Professor Ma. Luisa Camagay and Professor Wystan dela Peña for its publication through the
Surian ng Wikang Filipino.
115. LIHAM KAY APACIBLE
Mga negosasyon para sa mga armas. – Panibagong pagkaantala. – Ang mga kinatawang Filipino.
– Palaging nagmamatyag ang mga Amerikano. – Paghahanap ng mga sundalo o opisyal sa
hukbong reserbado ng Hapon.
637 Miyokoji Yama, Kitagata, Korakigun,
Yokohama, 2 Enero 1899.
Sr. Don G. APACIBLE,
Hongkong.
140
MAHAL KONG KAIBIGAN: Natanggap ko na ang iyong mga liham na may petsang ika-5, 9,
22, at 23 ng nakaraang Disyembre. Binasa kong mabuti ang lahat ng ito. Natanggap ko ang
unang sulat mula sa mga komisyonadong sinalubong ko sa Kobe tulad ng nabalitaan ninyo sa
pamamagitan ng aking postcard. Natanggap ko kasama ng huling sulat ang letra de cambio na
may numero 176 na maipapalit sa Yokohama Specie Bank Ltd. Sa halagang 65.48 yen, bilang
pagbabalik sa mga ginastos ko sa papel. Salamat dito. ayon sa inyong bilin, ilalagay ko bilang
gastos ng representasyon dito ang mga kinuha ni Sr. G. Agoncillo. Padadalhan ko kayo ng
listahan ng mga gastos dito sa susunod na liham. Wala akong panahon sa ngayon.
Tumuloy na sa San Francisco sina Sr. Luna, Sr. Lozada, at Sr. Marti noong ika-27 ng
nakaraang buwan. Sinunod nila Heneral Riego at Sr. M. Rivera ang payo ng mga Hapones at
naiwan sila rito. Nakatira sila sa bahay ninyo at ni Sr. Rivero. Bago umalis ang tatlong nabanggit,
nakausap naming noong ika-23 ang isang taong may napakataas na posisyon sa kasalukuyang
pamahalaan. Sinabi sa amin ng ginoong ito na hindi tatanggapin ng Hapon na masakop tayo ng
ibang bansang makapangyarihan. Sinabi niyang natutuwa ang Hapon na gumaganda ang takbo
ng ating Gobyerno at inaasam nito ang pagtatatag ng ating Republika. Hindi na siya
makapagdagdag dito dahil isa siyang opisyal ng pamahalaan. Ngunit dahil itinataguyod niya ang
kapayapaan, pinagpayuhan niya ang mga komisyonado na ituloy ang kanilang biyahe para sa
propaganda sa Amerika at Europa, lalung-lalo na sa Inglatera at Alemanya. Walang dudang
pakikinggan ng Amerika ang payo ng dalawang bansang ito. Tulad ng sinabi ko na sa inyo, higit
na matutulugan tayo ng mga militar ngunit hindi tayo dapat magtaka na nagmula sa isang
diplomatiko ang mga pangungusap na iyon. Hinggil naman sa kasalukuyang ginagawang
negosasyon para sa mga armas, nagkaroon ng panibagong pagkaantala, ngayong pang hawak na
namin ang 50 mil yen na ipinadala ninyo. Imposible kaming makakilos dahil walang tao rito
mula noong Pasko. Bukod dito, palaging nagmamatyag ang mga Amerikano sa pagdating ng
mga komisyonado. Ito ang pumipigil sa mga Hapon na bumuo ng isang mapanganib na desisyon.
Sinasabing dapat nilang makuhang pagkatiwalaan muli ng mga Amerikano tulad ng dati bago
sila kumilos. Lubos naming ikinalulungkot ito. upang madaliin ang takbo ng mga pangyayari,
ipinaiwan namin dito si Heneral Riego. Hinihintay naming ngayon ang ika-8 sa pagbalik ng mga
nagsipagbakasyon at muli naming lalakarin ang bagay na ito. kapag natapos na ang mga
nakabimbing negosasyon at narito na ang hahalili sa akin, uuwi na ako dahil ito rin ang
kagustuhan ng ating Presidente. Naghahanap kami ng mga sundalong retirado o nasa hukbong
reserbado na gustong sumama. Dapat maganda ang kanilang ugali, marunong ng Ingles o
Pranses, at hindi mahirap pakisamahan. Hindi ito pagsasantabi ng mga opisyal na maaring ibigay
sa ating pamahalaan. Sinabi sa akin ng Direktor ng Giyera sa isang liham na may 50 ang
kailagan doon. Mahihirapan ang pamahalaan na bigyan tayo ng ganoon karaming mga opisyal.
Binabati ko kayo ng Manigong Bagong Taon at muli nagsasabing isa ninyong magili na kaibigan
at kasama si
M. PONCE.
