126
TOPIC 5: Philippine-American War
List of Reading Materials:
• Account of Private William Grayson
• Address Adopted by Anti-Imperialist League
• Aguinaldo’s Declaration of War
• Aguinaldo’s Declaration of Surrender
• Benevolent Assimilation Proclamation
• Cartas Sobre La Revolucion
• Diary of Lt. Ernest Motsch
• Letter of Henry Thompson to his parents
• Correspondences relating to War with Spain
• Liberty Poems
127
Introduction to the Philippine-American War
On 04 February 1899, two days prior to the US Congress’ ratification of the 1898 Treaty of Paris
war broke-out between the forces of the first Philippine Republic headed by President Emilio F.
Aguinaldo and the American Forces in the country. The war was regarded as a continuation of
the ongoing 1896 Philippine Revolution, while the United States simply regarded the conflict as
an insurrection. The war led to the deaths of Filipino combatants and the fall of the first
Philippine Republic. The war officially ended in July 1902.
This section contains primary and secondary sources that will help the students enrich their
understanding and learning of the significant events that transpired during the Filipino-American
War. Primary sources such as the account of Private Willian Grayson, Aguinaldo’s Declaration of
War, and the Address Adopted by Anti-Imperialist League provide a glimpse into the early parts
of the war. On the other hand, secondary sources on the Filipino-American War in this section
provides a historiographical understanding of the event.
128
Account of Private William Grayson 19
The Treaty of Paris of 1898 ended the Spanish-American War and decided on the fate of Spain’s
remaining colonies including the Philippines. For this, it was also of great importance to the
Filipinos who had been fighting for their independence since 1896. Unfortunately, its contents
were finalized without consulting with Aguinaldo’s government, thereby amplifying suspicions
regarding the true motives of the Americans in the Philippines. This eventually led to the
outbreak of the Philippine-American War on February 4, 1899 – an event previously called the
“San Juan Bridge Incident.” Further investigations later revealed that the first shot of the war
occurred in Silencio cor. Sociego Streets in Santa Mesa, Manila. 20
One of the primary sources regarding this event was from Private William Walter Grayson, an
American volunteer soldier of the First Nebraska Volunteer Infantry. From his own recollection
of the encounter, it becomes clear that it was Grayson himself who fired the first shot which
killed two Filipino soldiers. According to Teodoro Agoncillo, General Arthur MacArthur issued
his order to advance against the Filipinos the day after this incident without even properly
investigating the cause of the firing, thereby beginning the Philippine-American War.21
----------
Private William Grayson, in an interview, said of this important incident:
“About eight o'clock, (Private Orville) Miller and I were cautiously pacing our district. We came
to a fence and were trying to see what the Filipinos were up to. Suddenly, near at hand, on our
left, there was a low but unmistakable Filipino outpost signal whistle. It was immediately
answered by a similar whistle about twenty-five yards to the right. Then a red lantern flashed its
signal from blockhouse No. 7. We had never seen such a sign used before.
In a moment something rose slowly up not twenty-five feet in front of us. It was a Filipino. I
yelled ‘halt’ made it pretty loud, for I was accustomed to challenging the officer of the guard in
Edwin Wildman, Aguinaldo: A Narrative of Filipino Ambitions (Boston, Massachusetts: Lothrop
19 Publishing Company, 1901), p. 195-196, accessed 25 October 2020, http://
name.umdl.umich.edu/ahz9331.0001.001.
National Historical Institute, “Board Resolution 07, S. 2003: Authorizing the Transfer of the 20
Historical Marker for the Site of the First Shot of the Philippine-American War from San Juan
Bridge to Silencio corner Sociego St., Sta. Mesa, Manila,” accessed 25 October 2020, https://
drive.google.com/file/d/0B9c6mrxI4zoYRjU5VUVzRk1jaWs/view.
Teodoro Agoncillo, History of the Filipino People, 8th edition (Quezon City: C&E Publishing, 21
Inc., 2012), p. 226.
129
approved military style. I challenged him with another loud ‘halt.’ Then he shouted ‘halto’ to me.
Well, I thought the best thing to do was to shoot him. He dropped. If I didn't kill him, I guess he
died of fright. Then two Filipinos sprang out of the gateway about fifteen feet from us. I called
‘halt’ and Miller fired and dropped one. I saw that another was left. Well, I think I got my second
Filipino that time.
We retreated to where our six other fellows were, and I said: 'Line up, fellows; the " niggers" are
in here all through these yards.' We then retreated to the pipe line and got behind the water main
and stayed there all night. It was some minutes after our second shots before the Filipinos began
firing."
130
Address Adopted by the Anti-Imperialist League, February 10, 1899 22
In December 1898, US President William McKinley first openly declared his decision to annex
the Philippines in his Benevolent Assimilation Proclamation which was shortly followed by the
ratification of the Treaty of Paris on February 6, 1898. And while this plan to take over the
Philippines received significant support from many Americans, a number of prominent citizens
of the country, many of whom were politicians and intellectuals, still fearlessly expressed their
opposition to the measure. In June 1898, these dissenters, which included former president
Grover Cleveland, former senator George S. Boutwell, Stanford University’s founding president
David Starr Jordan, writer Mark Twain, and steel magnate and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie,
formed the Anti-Imperialist League.
As a response to Filipino-American hostilities, this Boston-based league released a statement on
February 10, 1898 which criticized the expansionist ideals of the US government as largely
inconsistent with the founding principles of their country. It also warned that any further move to
be committed by the Americans pertinent to the Philippines might endanger the security not only
of the US but as well as of the entire world. The statement likewise beseeched the US
government to acknowledge Aguinaldo as the rightful president of the Philippines and its
congress as a legitimate representation of the people similar to the Continental Congress of the
13 British Colonies which later became the United States. In the end, the members of the league
demanded the US government to withdraw its military forces from the Philippines and to instead
recognize its independence.
----------
10 February 1899
The full ratification of the Treaty with Spain will cause a technical change in the relations of the
United States to the Philippine Islands, but will afford no- reason for any change of the purposes
of the Anti-Imperialists in regard to the future of the islands, nor will it in the least affect the
clear duty of this Republic.
We are now engaged in warfare with the inhabitants of those islands. It is unprofitable to discuss
the question as to which party began hostilities. No other result could have been expected, when
the lines of two opposing military forces were held so close and in such tense condition that little
was needed to cause an explosion.
22 Anti-Imperialist League, Address Adopted by the Anti-Imperialist League, February 10, 1899
(Boston, Massachusetts: Anti-Imperialist League, 1899), accessed 25 October 2020, https://
archive.org/details/addressadoptedby00anti.
131
Certain facts, however, are beyond dispute: that Aguinaldo was brought to the islands by our own
warship, that his aid was accepted and desired in our military operations against the Spaniards,
and that hopes of independence were encouraged by our consuls and other officers. It is equally
indisputable that a parliament of the islands, organized by representatives elected by 186 towns
and provinces, chose Aguinaldo President and framed a constitution, which was promulgated,
defining the powers and duties of the separate departments of the government with remarkable
clearness and ability; that the government so formed beyond a doubt represented fairly the
people of the islands and probably with quite as much fairness as the Continental Congress in
Philadelphia, in 1775, represented the people of the thirteen States.
It is also undeniable that on January 5 President McKinley issued a proclamation through
General Otis, declaring that on the 10th of the previous month the Philippine Islands had been
ceded to this country by Spain by the signature of the Treaty of Paris, and further ordered him to
extend the military government of the United States ‘to the whole of the ceded territory,’ and to
demand the surrender of Iloilo, which was then held by the Filipinos in an orderly manner by
capture from the Spaniards.
It cannot be claimed in law that this assumption of power was warranted in advance of the
ratification of the Treaty by both parties, and there can he no doubt that the arbitrary claim
greatly aggravated the people of the islands, whose hope of independence seemed thus rudely
destroyed.
No declaratory resolution as to the future of the islands was assented to by the Administration
before the ratification of the Treaty by the Senate, and none has been made since.
Any right that we assert to ownership of the Philippines must rest, therefore, either upon
conquest or upon purchase from their Spanish oppressors, or upon both, and in any case it is, as
we believe, inconsistent with the principles of this Republic, and fraught with danger to its peace
and to the peace of the world.
The first result we already witness, a war of subjugation, which must embitter the people we
seek to rule, and which, however successful, must bring disaster and death to our soldiers, and
unmeasured cost to our people.
Profoundly impressed with the seriousness of the situation, it is the purpose of the Anti
Imperialists to continue the circulation of literature, to assist in the formation of leagues, and by
public meetings, and every proper means known to a free people, to agitate for the revival in the
132
land of the spirit of Washington and Lincoln, to protest against a spirit of militarism and force, to
oppose the colonial idea and a permanently large standing army, and to assert the vital truths of
the Declaration of Independence embodied in the Constitution and indissolubly connected with
the welfare of this Republic.
They urge, therefore, all lovers of freedom, without regard to party associations, to cooperate
with them to the following ends:
First. That our government shall take immediate steps towards a suspension of hostilities in the
Philippines and a conference with the Philippine leaders, with a view to preventing further
bloodshed upon the basis of a recognition of their freedom and independence as soon as proper
guarantees can be hail of order and protection to property.
Second. That the Congress of the United States shall tender an official assurance to the
inhabitants of the Philippine Islands that they will encourage and assist in the organization of
such a government in the islands as the people thereof shall prefer, and that upon its organization
in stable manner the United States, in accordance with its traditional and prescriptive policy in
such cases, will recognize the independence of the Philippines and its equality among nations,
and gradually withdraw all military and naval forces.
133
President Emilio Aguinaldo’s Declaration of War on the United States (Malolos, Bulacan on
February 4, 1899)
Following the conflict that erupted between the Philippine and American forces on 04 February
1899, at around nine o’ clock p.m. President Emilio Aguinaldo received a communication from
the Caloocan station regarding the event. He issued a declaration to the Filipino people saying
that he had taken necessary actions to preserved the friendly ties between the Filipinos and the
American forces, however, he said that the national integrity must be preserved as well. In this
declaration, he also recognized that the American forces who were acting as friends and
liberators unjustly attacked the Filipino forces. Aguinaldo issued three commands in his
declaration: first, he ordered that all peace and friendly relations between the Filipino and
American forces be severed and the latter be treated as enemies; second, the captured Americans
will be treated as prisoners of wars; and lastly, the declaration must be copy furnished to all the
consuls in Manila and the Congress.
A copy of Aguinaldo’s declaration is available in John Taylor’s Philippine Insurgent Records.
Taylor was a member of the United States Army in the Philippines. He was given appointed to be
in charge of all the records seized by the American forces during the Philippine-American War. A
compilation of these records came to known later on as the Philippine Insurgent Records.
Excerpt:
Nine o'clock p.m., this date, I received from Caloocan station a message communicated to me
that the American forces, without prior notification or any just motive, attacked our camp at San
Juan del Monte and our forces garrisoning the block-houses around the outskirts of Manila,
causing the losses among our soldiers, who in view of this unexpected aggression and of the
decided attack of the aggressors, were obliged to defend themselves until the firing became
general all along the line. No one can deplore more than I this rupture of friendly relations. I
have a clear conscience that I have endeavored to avoid it at all costs, using all my efforts to
preserve friendship with the army of occupation, even at the cost of not a few humiliations and
many sacrificed rights. But it is my unavoidable duty to maintain the integrity of the national
honor and that of the army so unjustly attacked by those who, posing as our friends and
liberators, attempted to dominate us in place of the Spaniards, as is shown by the grievances
enumerated in my manifesto of January 8th last; such as the continued outrages and violent
exactions committed against the people of Manila, the useless conferences, and all my frustrated
efforts in favor of peace and concord.
Summoned by this unexpected provocation, urged by the duties imposed upon me by honor and
patriotism and for the defense of the nation entrusted to me, calling on God as a witness of my
good faith and the uprightness of my intentions, I order and command:
134
1. Peace and friendly relations between the Philippine forces and the American forces of
occupation are broken, and the latter will be treated as enemies, within the limits prescribed by
the laws of war.
2. American soldiers who may be captured by the Philippine forces will be treated as prisoners of
war.
3. This proclamation shall be communicated to the accredited consuls of Manila, and to
Congress, in order that it may accord the suspension of the constitutional guaranties and the
resulting declaration of war.
Given at Malolos, February 4, 1899.
EMILIO AGUINALDO
General-in-Chief
