260
“Commonwealth Act No. 1 An Act to Provide for the National Defense of the
Philippines, Penalizing Certain Violations Thereof, Appropriating Funds Therefor, And
for Other Purposes” Accessed December 4, 2020.
Source: https://www.officialgazette.gov.ph/1935/12/21/commonwealth-act-no-1/
One the first laws passed by the National Assembly and enacted by the Philippine
Commonwealth was the National Defense Act of 1935. The Commonwealth Act No. 1 aimed for
the creation of an independent military for the Philippines. Prior to the creation of this act, the
Office of the Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government under the U.S. General
Douglas MacArthur heeded the call of President Quezon to form a system of national defense
towards the independence of the Philippines.
The section of the law provided shows the articles on the personnel such as enlistment, the
creation of the military academy, and provision for a reserve force with reserved and
noncommissioned officers. The law provided for the drafting of Filipino men, between the ages
of 21 and 50. The Philippine Military Academy would provide the training of selected candidates
for permanent commission in the Regular Force while the Reserve Units would come from
colleges and universities in the Philippines.
EXCERPT:
ARTICLE III
Enlistment and Reenlistment
SECTION 27. Any male citizen of the Philippines between eighteen and thirty years of
age, able-bodied, free from disease, of good moral character and habits, of average
intelligence, and possessed of such educational attainments as may be prescribed, may be
enlisted in the Regular Force under the following restrictions:
(a) Enlistments shall be for a term of three years, and may be made by the recruiting
officers at stations of the Regular Force.
(b) Unmarried minors between eighteen and twenty-one years of age may be enlisted
only on the written and duly attested consent of the father, the mother when she is the
only surviving parent, or the publicly known guardian.
(c) Enlistments for service in any province, except for the Regular Division, the Artillery
Corps, and Air Corps, shall be from among residents thereof. In so far as practicable,
enlistments in these forces shall be apportioned among the various provinces of the
Philippines.
261
SECTION 28. Regulations applying to the reenlistment and to the retirement privileges
of noncommissioned officers of the Regular Force shall be prescribed by the President.
SECTION 29. An enlisted man who shall have served honorably at least three years and
does not reenlist shall be exempt from further military service except in a national
emergency. He shall be required, however, to register his address at the military
headquarters nearest to his place of residence.
ARTICLE IV
Military Academy
SECTION 30. There shall be established a military training school to be named the
Philippine Military Academy, for the training of selected candidates for permanent
commission in the Regular Force. The student body in the Military Academy shall be
known as the Cadet Corps of the Army of the Philippines.
SECTION 31. The President is authorized to appoint to the Military Academy annually,
subject to such physical and mental examinations as he may prescribe, the number of
cadets necessary to maintain the Cadet Corps at a strength of not to exceed three hundred
and fifty. Cadets shall be selected from among qualified candidates as hereinafter
provided. Candidates for admission shall be single, in good physical condition, not less
than seventeen nor more than twenty-two years of age, and shall be nominated by the
Members of the National Assembly, each of whom may nominate any number of
candidates. The President shall appoint from among those who pass the physical and
mental examinations with the highest ratings the number or numbers necessary to fill the
existing vacancies: Provided, That a quota of three members of the Cadet Corps shall be
allotted to each Assembly district: Provided, further, That in case no candidates from a
given Assembly district attain the required minimum ratings, a second examination shall
be given during the same year to nominees from that district. If on the second
examination no candidate shall attain the required minimum rating, the vacancies in the
district quota shall be filled by the President from successful candidates at large.
The pay and allowances of students at the Military Academy shall be fixed by the
President.
Any student who shall, after entrance to the Academy and before completion of the
prescribed course of training, be found to be physically unfit for military duty by reason
of injury or disease incident to the service, shall be retired with the rank of cadet and shall
be entitled to the retired pay and allowances of a third lieutenant of the Regular Force.
262
Upon satisfactory completion of the course of instruction at the Military Academy
candidates shall be commissioned third lieutenants in the Regular or Reserve Forces with
relative rank in the order of final general standing as determined by the Faculty Board
and Commandant of the Academy, and approved by the Chief of Staff.
ARTICLE V
The Reserve Force
SECTION 32. The Reserve Force shall consist of such number of Infantry Divisions
located as the President may direct; of such additional separate regiments, battalions,
companies, and similar separate units as the President may authorize; of all reserve
classes not assigned to the above units, and of the Reserve elements of the Offshore
Patrol.
The organization of reserve land and air units shall, in so far as practicable, be that of
corresponding tactical units of the Regular Force.
SECTION 33. The Chief of Staff may detail or assign to duty with Reserve units such
enlisted men of the Regular Force as he deems necessary.
ARTICLE VI
Reserve Officers and Noncommissioned Officer
SECTION 34. Any person who shall have completed his trainee instruction and who is
selected for training as a commissioned officer shall pursue a theoretical course of
training of not less than six months to be prescribed by the Chief of Staff, upon
completion of which he shall be assigned to duty with a Regular unit as probationary
third lieutenant for another period of six months. At the end of this service those who
have displayed qualities of leadership and who have demonstrated their fitness to
command may be appointed and commissioned third lieutenants of the Reserve Force and
assigned to an organization thereof. Those who fail to complete the course of training
shall be transferred to the Reserve Force as enlisted men and shall be assigned to an
organization thereof.
263
SECTION 35. At such colleges and universities as the President may designate there shall
be established and maintained Reserve Officers’ Training Units of such arms and services
as he shall specify, where every physically fit student shall be required to pursue a course
of military instruction designed to qualify him for a commission as a third lieutenant of
Reserve. In so far as may be practicable, the student shall be permitted to choose the arm
or service in which he wishes to train. This course of military instruction, if pursued to
completion, shall exempt students from trainee instruction. It shall not exempt them from
registration.
SECTION 36. The Chief of Staff shall, by mutual agreement with the head of the
institution, designate the senior military instructor and such commissioned and enlisted
personnel as may be necessary for each institution. He is authorized to issue to such
institutions the arms, equipment and other property which he deems essential to the
conduct of this instruction.
SECTION 37. Each year the senior military instructor shall submit to the Chief of Staff
the names of those members of the graduating class whom he recommends for further
training. These graduates may be ordered to organizations of the Regular Force for a six
months’ probationary period. At the end of this service those who have displayed their
fitness for Commission may be appointed and commissioned third lieutenants of the
Reserves and assigned to an organization thereof.
SECTION 38. Graduates who are not recommended for training as third lieutenants and
those who fail to qualify for appointment as such shall be assigned to the nearest age
group in the Reserve and assigned to an organization thereof as private or
noncommissioned officers as recommended. Students of military age who do not
complete their courses of study at an institution of learning provided with a Reserve
Officers’ Training Unit shall be liable for trainee instruction immediately upon severing
their connection with the institution. If more than 20 years of age, they shall be assigned
to the trainee class next to be called.
SECTION 39. The President shall appoint and commission, upon the recommendation of
the Chief of Staff, such reserve officers as shall in his opinion be needed.
SECTION 40. In so far as may be practicable, original appointments by the President in
grades above third lieutenant shall be made from among those formerly holding Reserve
commissions in the United States Army and from former officers of the Philippine Scouts
and Constabulary.
264
SECTION 41. Noncommissioned officers of the Regular Force between the ages of
twenty-one and thirty years who are recommended for appointment as third lieutenants
shall pursue the course of instruction of six months prescribed for those who have
completed their trainee instruction, and who are recommended for training to qualify as
reserve officers. Upon satisfactory completion of this course they may be appointed and
commissioned third lieutenants of the Reserves and assigned to an organization of the
Reserve Force. Except upon mobilization, no service as a reserve officer may be
performed by an enlisted man of the Regular Force.
SECTION 42. Medical reserve officers shall be procured from graduates of medical
colleges and universities under such regulations as may be prescribed by the
President.
SECTION 43. Reserve officers shall be physically examined upon each assignment to
active duty. Any reserve officer found physically unfit for active field service shall be
discharged.
SECTION 44. Young men who complete their trainee instruction and are selected for
additional training to qualify them as noncommissioned officers of the Reserve Force
shall pursue a prescribed course of three months. Upon satisfactory completion thereof
they shall be warranted in the noncommissioned officer grade for which they shall have
qualified, and then transferred to the Reserve Force and assigned to an organization
thereof.
SECTION 45. The Chief of Staff shall be empowered to organize and establish such
special and advanced school units as he may deem proper for the special training of
officers of the technical and supply sections and services, and for the advanced training of
selected officers for field, staff, and command duties.
SECTION 46. All candidates for appointment as reserve officers, except medical officers,
shall be required to qualify for appointment as third lieutenants of the line before being
permitted to pursue any special course pertaining to the technical and supply services.
ARTICLE VII
Active Duty Training of Reservists
SECTION 47. Periods of active duty training in the Reserve Force shall be as prescribed
by the Chief of Staff. In so far as may be practicable, the active duty periods for the three
echelons shall be as follows: First Reserves, annually, not less than ten days; Second
Reserves, annually, not less than five days; and Third Reserves, every third year, not less
than seven days.
265
During such periods of active duty training the reservist shall be amenable to the laws
and regulations prescribed for the Regular Force. Except with his own consent, no
enlisted reservist may be required in time of peace to serve more than thirty days on
active duty in any calendar year.
SECTION 48. Any reservist who fails to report for active duty training as directed by the
Chief of Staff shall be punished as a court-martial may direct.
SECTION 49. Any employee of the Government called for trainee instruction, or for
regular annual active duty training, shall not be compelled to lose his position or to suffer
a loss of pay due to his absence in the fulfillment of his military obligations.
SECTION 50. Mobilization centers shall be constituted as follows:
(a) Mobilization centers shall be established for the purpose of providing storage for the
arms, equipment, clothing, and records of units, other than those of the Regular Force, to
be mobilized in a national emergency, of making provision in advance of mobilization for
the necessary shelter for men and animals of such units during mobilization, and of
reducing to a minimum the period necessary for mobilization.
(b) One mobilization center shall be established for each battalion or similar unit or, when
for the best interests of the Philippines, for regiments or larger units.
(c) Provincial Commanders, acting under the Chief of Staff, shall be responsible that all
arms, equipment, and other material stored in such buildings within their respective
provinces are properly cared for and secured, and that all records turned over to the chief
caretaker by military units are preserved intact.
The Constabulary shall, whenever practicable, be charged under the Provincial
Commanders with the care of the arms, equipment and other materials, and of the records
at mobilization centers.
266
United States. High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 1936. Annual Report of the
United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands Commissioner to the Philippine
Islands Covering the Calendar Year 1935-1936. Washington: U.S. G.P.O. Accessed December
4, 2010.
Source: https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/100145145/Home
By the Commonwealth period, the highest position held by an American official in the
Philippines is the High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. This is an excerpt from the
annual report sent by Frank Murphy, the first High Commissioner, to the United States
government.
The excerpt below shows a reporting of the Sakdal demonstration in Manila on October 3, 1936.
The Manila demonstration was part of the series of activities of the Sakdal Party. Founded by
Benigno Ramos in 1930, the Sakdal Party was a populist movement that advocated for
Philippine nationalism and independence and agrarian socialism. Most of their activity revolved
in Central Luzon such as the provinces of Laguna, Rizal, Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, and Pampanga.
Excerpt:
VI. PUBLIC ORDER
26. Two minor disturbances.—Public order was good during the period under report, except for
two minor disturbances.
The first of these was an outbreak of brigandage in the mountains of Laguna, which
began a short time before the end of the former regime. The Commonwealth President went to
Laguna soon after his inauguration and gave this matter his personal attention to such effect that
the outbreak was suppressed in a very short time.
A terroristic demonstration in the city of Manila on the evening of October 3, 1936, was
the subject of an inquiry from the Bureau of Insular Affairs. This inquiry and the reply by the
Acting High Commissioner were as follows:
[Extra priority radio no. 740]
267
WASHINGTON, October 21, 1936.
UNITED STATES HIGH COMMISSIONER,
Manila:
Press dispatches of 19th instant report terrorist plots to create disturbances
through assassinations, bombings, etc. Please radio brief summary of the facts as developed to
date.
COX.
[Extra priority radio]
OCTOBER 22, 1936.
SECRETARY OF WAR,
Washington (Cox):
Reference your no. 740 October 21, an outbreak occurred October 3 shortly after 8
o'clock p. m. in the city of Manila. Four explosions were heard, eight fires started, and there were
four attempts at arson, all within a period of 3 hours. Parsons Hardware near the Ayala Bridge
and nearby buildings were damaged to the extent of 1,000,000 pesos. One water main in Santa
Mesa was broken by explosives, shutting off the water supply to a large section of Manila for
several hours.
Theodoro Navarro and Lorenzo Galang, said to be leaders of Sakdals, were arrested
October 5. They denied having participated in the acts of October 3, but news stories later
indicated they were involved in confessions reported in the press October 20. Many of the news
stories are vague and give the impression of reportorial guesswork.
Since October 3 police have found bombs in several Manila buildings and seven bombs
were reported found upon the arrest of five members of Sakdal party at Malabon October 18.
Newspaper of October 20 carried stories that “Sakdal terror plot spreading.” These stories
followed the arrest of the five Sakdal leaders mentioned above. Confessions as reported by the
press were to the effect that Sakdals planned to set fire Manila on the night of October 3 and then
sweep the five nearby Provinces and take control of municipal and provincial governments.
According to press reports leaders stated in confessions that they lost their nerve when they
entered Manila and heard the explosions on night of October 3.
268
Philippine Army officials report that there is no truth in the statement that a plot was
unearthed to assassinate Government officials including the Archbishop and the High
Commissioner, but rather that the persons questioned denied there was any such plot. They report
that no communications have been received by local Sakdalistas from Ramos for about 1 year
and there is no organized opposition to any activities of the Government; that such acts of
terrorism that have occurred have been sporadic and not a part of a general plan; that the present
unrest is confined to the city of Manila and the provinces of Rizal, Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, and
Pampanga, and that there is peace and order in all other parts of the Philippines including
Laguna, Cavite, and Batangas Provinces. The reports received today indicate a plan for an
uprising in the vicinity of Manila on November 1. The general public seems very little disturbed.
United States Army officials, Philippine Army officials, and police officials are alert but not
apprehensive. They believe that disorders are local in character, poorly led, poorly financed. and
loosely organized.
They report that labor groups in Manila are restive because of the failure of wages to be
advanced in the face of advances in prices of commodities and more prosperous times among
manufacturing, shipping, and commercial interests. The recent typhoons did considerable
damage to the rice crop which has caused suffering in Central Luzon and the Cagayan Walley.
This suffering, according to reports, was quite acute but is being rapidly alleviated. Tenant
farmers are complaining because landlords have insisted upon advance payments of cash rent
when customarily they have been content to receive rents on installments. Dissatisfaction with
authorities is attributed by some as a protest against announcement by President Quezon that on
account of present unrest he did not intend to release political prisoners on November 15 as
previously announced. Others believe that the Government is magnifying reports of violence as
justification for building up the Philippine Army. Philippine Army officials however deplore the
publicity given to reports of disorders as they say that such reports are frequently erroneous and
nearly always exaggerated. Bulletin this morning has eight-column headline, “Fear New Sakdal
Outbreak”, this being based on a rumor that “a big haul of rifles and ammunition was smuggled
into one of the coast towns of the Philippines.” The Bulletin story goes on to say “the tense
situation is further aggravated by the flight of the Sakdal leaders to the mountains, the reported
burial of all "red" documents and the seething unrest among the radical followers of the political
prisoners who lost their chances of early freedom when President Quezon decided not to give
them amnesty.” The Philippine Army officials state that there is no truth in the statement that
rifles and ammunition were smuggled into one of the coast towns nor has there been a flight of
Sakdal leaders to the mountains. There are very few political prisoners as Governor Murphy
pardoned the majority of all those convicted for participating in the disorders of May 1935 and
since that time President Quezon has pardoned a number. I believe there is no cause for
apprehension here. The Government is in strong hands and I believe the Philippine authorities are
doing everything in their power to relieve the suffering and to improve the lot of the poor and
unemployed. President Quezon is in very close touch with the situation and with all classes of
people. He has visited devastated areas and has come in contact first hand with the sufferers. The
269
Assembly has just appropriated $ 1,500,000 to relieve the situation. United States Army and
Navy authorities see no reason to be alarmed.
My weekly reports sent by air mail to High Commissioner Murphy give all details as I
get them from press and from other sources. This radio is based upon reports received from
military authorities of the United States Army, naval authorities, and Philippine Army authorities,
inquiries made from numerous individuals and reports in the press and personal observation of
myself and staff
JONES
270
Letter of President Quezon on Three-point Policy for Mindanao and Sulu, October 08,
1937
This document was crafted by Jorge Vargas, and serves as a reply of President Quezon to a letter
sent by Sultan Ombra Amilbangsa, an assemblyman representing Sulu. Amilbangsa sent a letter
expressing his concerns over the policies defining the Commonwealth government’s
administration over Mindanao and Sulu. Jorge Vargas (1890-1980) was a lawyer and diplomat,
who served in Quezon’s cabinet as the executive secretary from 1936 to 1941. Later on, he
became the secretary of national defense in 1941.
Ambilbagsa agreed with the policy to give a broader power to the Commissioner of Mindanao
and Sulu as overseer of administrative affairs, However, he laments the nonrecognition of the
various existent titles across different areas in Mindanao, asks for consultation on the
appointment of army officers as governors in the Moro provinces, and concludes with
identifying himself as belonging to group of the supporters of his administration not as passive
yielders but as engaging allies offering constructive criticisms and suggestion to policy and
programs.
Letter of President Quezon on Three-point Policy for Mindanao and Sulu, October 8,
1937 Letter*
of
His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon
President of the Philippines
On Three-Point Policy for Mindanao and Sulu
[Released on October 8, 1937]
Sir:
I have the honor to inform you that your letter of the 2nd instant, addressed to His Excellency,
the President, in which you comment on his “three-point policy” on the affairs of Mindanao and
Sulu, has been received. In this connection permit me to call your attention to the fact that in his
memorandum to the Secretary of the Interior dated September 20, 1937, His Excellency does not
seek to interfere with the use of titles by Moro sultans or datus so long as it is clearly understood
that a title carries with it no official rights or privileges. What the President desires to emphasize
is that there are no privileged classes under this Government and no authority vested on any
271
individual not occupying an official position. In other words, the President is determined to
consider and to act towards the Mohammedan Filipinos as he considers and acts towards the
Christians, precisely because he agrees with you that the so-called Moro problem is a myth.
His Excellency appreciates your kind interest in his administration, particularly in matters
affecting your district, and he wishes me to inform you that your recommendation for the
retention of Major Leon Angeles as Provincial Governor of Sulu for the time being, will be given
due consideration.
Very respectfully,
Jorge B. Vargas
Secretary to the President
Hon. Ombra Amilbangsa
National Assembly
Manila
* This is a reply to a letter of Assemblyman Ombra Amilbangsa, which is as
follows: NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
MANILA
October 2, 1937
His Excellency
The PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
Malacañan Palace
Manila
Dear Mr. President:
1. In recent issues of the local dailies, I read with deep interest the released copy of Your
Excellency’s Memorandum, addressed to the Honorable, the Secretary of the Interior, in which
Your Excellency’s “Three-Point Policies,” defining how affairs in Moroland are to be
272
administered, was embodied. As Your Excellency’s loyal supporter, I cannot let the news pass
without commenting on the policies, especially in their relations to my district.
2. The policy of giving a free hand to the Commissioner of Mindanao and Sulu on all plans he
may deem fit to execute is indeed plausible and commendable, and it could not have been
otherwise. As a matter of fact, I joined Assemblymen Fortich and Cabili in endorsing that policy
to Your Excellency when the measure was yet pending the action of the National Assembly.
3. As to the non-recognition of the various titles, a practice still adhered to by the various
Mohammedan elements in Mindanao and Sulu, I think, Mr. President, the policy as released
covering this subject was most unnecessary, as the non-recognition has already taken effect since
the abrogation of the Bates Treaty and the implantation of the Civil Government in the regions
referred to. In the agreement concluded between the Sultan of Sulu and Frank Carpenter, then
Secretary of the Department of Mindanao and Sulu, the former is recognized as a temporal head
of that region and as such his office is confined to religious activities. In the light of these facts
the Government, I think, Mr. President, has no right to interfere with them so long as no law or
order is infringed. The religious titles ever since in vogue in the Mohammedan regions are akin
to religious titles enjoyed and practiced by the different Christian sects.
4. The policy of suppressing the practice of appointing army officers as governors in Moro
provinces is one thing about which I beg to be allowed to discuss at length and with liberty. The
administration dating back to the early American administrators, had initiated various policies
principally intended to maintain peace and order, but lamentably never promulgated policies to
effect universal improvements in those regions. As a result of this uncomprehensive plan, the
accomplishments were nothing more than the blowing out of the Moro cottas and enactment of
other bloody dramas. Judging from the records of the past, it seems that questions of efficiency
of administration in Moroland depend in a large measure, upon the personal ability, integrity and
far-sightedness of the local administrator rather than by imposing rigid obedience to mutable
policies.
5. Regarding the present incumbent, Major Leon Angeles, his administration since his
appointment is one worthy of praise and commendation. His experience and adeptness in
understanding conditions obtaining in the province, make him the most logical man to remain in
the position for sometime until Your Excellency think otherwise. He is the most capable Filipino
governor ever appointed to that position. I believe that in justice to the incumbent, Your
Excellency should allow him to remain for sometime in order that he could accomplish the
projects he has just started.
6. Talks of Moro problems, both of the past and the present, have been the topics deafening the
ears of the public. The Moros, myself included, are ignorant of the so-called Moro problems, and
we emphatically deny its existence.
273
7. In passing, I beg leave to state that in Mindanao Your Excellency has two groups of
supporters: the first are those who readily yield assent to what Your Excellency say, and the
second, those who study Your Excellency’s policy and offer constructive criticisms and
suggestions to the end that the country may be benefited. I am happy that I belong to the second
group so that if I express myself openly and frankly, it is because it is my honest and sincere
belief that in doing so, I am helping and coöperating with Your Excellency to perfect a policy
conducive to the general welfare of my people.
Respectfully yours,
(Sgd.) SULTAN OMBRA AMILBANGSA
Assemblyman for Sulu
274
Alzona, Encarnacion. 1937. “The Significance of the Women Suffrage Referendum” in
Encarnacion Alzona: An Anthology. edited by Maria Luisa Camagay. Quezon City: Office
of Research Coordination, University of the Philippines, 1996.
Encarnacion Alzona (1895-2001) was one of the revered women historians and educators in the
twentieth century Philippines. She was awarded as one of the National Scientists of the
Philippines in the field of History in 1985.
In this article, she wrote the importance of having a suffrage referendum that grants women the
right to vote. Alzona, who was the first woman to receive a doctorate degree in history, studied
the history of education, specifically the women’s education in history. Her study, The Filipino
Woman: Her Social, Economic and Political Status (1565-1933), attested the inherent equality of
Filipino women to men despite being deprived of education and political rights. Along with
prominent women, she championed support for women's suffrage through her writing such as
this published in periodical, The Woman’s World. Filipino women obtained the right to vote in
1937.
EXCERPT:
On April 30 Filipino women throughout the Archipelago will vote on the question of
woman suffrage. The referendum will determine whether or not the Filipino woman shall
exercise the right of suffrage. Considering the large number of registrants, the support of
influential men led by the President of the Philippine Commonwealth, and the earnestness of
women leaders, the coming referendum promises to turn in favor of the suffragists.
We ardently hope that more than half a million women registrants will vote favorably on
the question on April 30. Let no task on that day, women of the Philippines, deter you from going
to the nearest precinct to cast your affirmative vote. To discharge this duty will require only a
few minutes of your time, yet you will be taking away in a momentous event, unique in the
history of our country. By referring to the Filipino women the question of suffrage, which affects
not only themselves but the entire nation, is in itself an unequivocal admission on the part of the
framers of our constitution of their confidence in the ability of Filipino woman to decide a
national question. True to the Filipino tradition, our women would not impose a right and
responsibility upon the women unless women themselves desire it. They have therefore given us
the privilege of expressing our wishes on the subject.
Women of the Philippines, if you participate in the coming referendum your name shall be
written indelibly on the pages of our history, and your descendants will be proud of you and call
you emancipators of the women of your country.
275
Once you become an elector, you shall attain the same political status as the men. You
can help directly elect to public office a worthy candidate; you can help defeat a dishonest and
incapable aspirant. In a democratic country, the ballot is the most effective instrument in the
hands of the average man. Without it the average man is a forgotten man; but with it, the average
man becomes the most powerful man in the country. Government officials listen attentively to
his pleas or complaints, knowing that he is a voter, whose vote on election day must be reckoned
with. To the average man the ballot is an insurance against oppression and injustice; and let this
be borne in mind by our women who will soon be enfranchised. As women voters, we can wield
a salutary influence on politics if we use our power to combat corruption, injustice, and
oppression. Let us be judicious in the use of our newly acquired right, aware of the responsibility
that goes with it.
We are familiar with the electoral abuses which had been committed in the past. They
were a blot on our political life. As voters we can help the recurrence of such evils by refusing to
be a party in an unlawful scheme or vigorously denouncing any flagrant defiance of the election
law. Let none of us be guilty of giving our right to vote for a paltry consideration. We must use it
to bring the utmost good to society as whole.
The system of voting used in our country is the Australian ballot or the secret method of
voting. It assures every voter absolute secrecy and liberty in voting. Through this system he can
vote as he desires and he need not fear the political bosses of his locality.
After the grant of woman suffrage, our next campaign should be directed to making our
women intelligent and vigilant citizens. This task will devolve upon the thousands of educated
women scattered all over the Islands. It will be their duty to enlighten the mass of women of low
educational attainment whose knowledge about their new right is vague or confused.
